# File: flavor.txt

# This file is used to initialize the "flavor" information for the Angband game.
# Do not modify this file unless you know exactly what you are doing,
# unless you wish to risk possible system crashes and broken savefiles.

# kind:<tval>:<char>
# flavor:<index>:<attr>:<text>
# fixed:<index>:<sval>:<attr>:<text>

#### Lights
kind:light:~

flavor:306:Red:& red candle~
flavor:307:Blue:& blue candle~
flavor:308:Green:& green candle~
flavor:309:White:& white candle~
flavor:310:Light Slate:& silvery candle~
flavor:311:Cream:& stubby candle~
flavor:312:Cream:& long candle~
flavor:313:Cream:& tapered candle~
flavor:314:Cream:& ribbed candle~
flavor:315:Violet:& striped candle~

#### Food
kind:food:,

fixed:320:choke-apple:Light Green:& apple~
fixed:321:habanero:Red:& pepper~
fixed:322:snozzcumber:Green:& cucumber~


##### Rings #####
# These are precious or semi-precious stones

kind:ring:=

# Fixed: the One Ring
fixed:1:Ring of Power:Yellow:Plain Gold

# The Ring of Barahir 50
# The Ring of Tulkas 51

# The Ring of Fire 'Narya'
fixed:28:Ring of Fire:Red:Ruby

# The Ring of Adamant 'Nenya'
fixed:40:Ring of Adamant:Light Blue:Mithril

# The Ring of Firmament 'Vilya'
fixed:29:Ring of Firmament:Blue:Sapphire

flavor:2:Green:Alexandrite
flavor:3:Violet:Amethyst
flavor:4:Light Blue:Aquamarine
flavor:5:Light Blue:Azurite
flavor:6:Light Green:Beryl
flavor:7:Red:Bloodstone
flavor:8:White:Calcite
flavor:9:Red:Carnelian
flavor:10:Slate:Corundum
flavor:11:White:Diamond
flavor:12:Green:Emerald
flavor:13:Light Green:Fluorite
flavor:14:Red:Garnet
flavor:15:Light Slate:Hematite
flavor:16:Light Green:Jade
flavor:17:Umber:Jasper
flavor:18:Blue:Lapis Lazuli
flavor:19:Green:Malachite
flavor:20:White:Marble
flavor:21:Light Slate:Moonstone
flavor:22:Light Red:Onyx
flavor:23:Light Slate:Opal
flavor:24:White:Pearl
flavor:25:Light Slate:Quartz
flavor:26:Light Slate:Quartzite
flavor:27:Light Red:Rhodonite
#flavor:28:Red:Ruby
#flavor:29:Blue:Sapphire
flavor:30:Yellow:Tiger Eye
flavor:31:Yellow:Topaz
flavor:32:Light Blue:Turquoise
flavor:33:Light Umber:Zircon
flavor:34:White:Platinum
flavor:35:Light Umber:Bronze
flavor:36:Yellow:Gold
flavor:37:Light Dark:Obsidian
flavor:38:Light Slate:Silver
flavor:39:Umber:Amber
#flavor:40:Light Blue:Mithril
flavor:41:Light Dark:Jet
flavor:42:Yellow:Jewelled
flavor:43:Light Green:Adamantite

# Agate
# Black Diamond
# Blue Diamond
# Flawed Diamond
# Nephrite
# Rose Quartz
# Tanzanite
# Jacinth
# Platinum

##### Amulets #####

kind:amulet:"

# The Amulet of Carlammas
fixed:52:Amulet:Light Umber:Bronze

# The Amulet of Ingwe 51

# The Necklace of the Dwarves
fixed:55:Necklace:Yellow:Golden

# New Artifact (14): The Elfstone 'Elessar'
fixed:44:Elfstone:Green:Green

# New Artifact (15): The Jewel 'Evenstar'
fixed:46:Jewel:White:White

#flavor:44:Yellow:Amber
flavor:45:Light Umber:Driftwood
#flavor:46:White:Coral
flavor:47:Light Slate:Agate
flavor:48:White:Ivory
flavor:49:Light Dark:Obsidian
flavor:50:White:Bone
flavor:51:Light Umber:Brass
#flavor:52:Light Umber:Bronze
flavor:53:Slate:Pewter
flavor:54:Umber:Tortoise Shell
#flavor:55:Yellow:Golden
flavor:56:Light Blue:Azure
flavor:57:White:Crystal
flavor:58:Light Slate:Silver
flavor:59:Light Umber:Copper
flavor:60:Umber:Carved Oak
flavor:61:Light Slate:Dragon Tooth
flavor:62:Red:Ruby
flavor:63:Light Blue:Mithril
flavor:64:Light Green:Adamant
flavor:65:Slate:Flint Stone
flavor:66:Light Blue:Sea Shell
flavor:67:Light Slate:Mother-of-Pearl

# Azure
# Bead
# Dragon's Claw
# Enameled
# Horn
# Shark's Tooth
# Stained Glass
# Fingerbone
# Cog
# Alabaster
# Bone
# Crystal
# Enamel
# Flint
# Glass
# Granite
# Haematite
# Marble
# Obsidian
# Serpentine
# Porcelain

##### Devices #####
# These are described by what they do, or how you use them.
# Light, sound, movement.

kind:device:_

flavor:68:White:flashing
flavor:69:Blue:beeping
flavor:70:White:strobing
flavor:71:Slate:mechanical
flavor:72:Slate:telescoping
flavor:73:Green:humming
flavor:74:Light Dark:warm
flavor:75:White:pulsating
flavor:76:Slate:whining
flavor:77:White:illuminated
flavor:78:Light Blue:flickering
flavor:79:Light Blue:flaring
flavor:80:Yellow:glowing
flavor:81:Slate:whirring
flavor:82:Light Yellow:blinking
flavor:83:Light Blue:twinkling
flavor:84:Light Umber:buzzing
flavor:85:Red:spinning
flavor:86:Yellow:oscillating
flavor:87:Green:twisting
flavor:88:Orange:twirling
flavor:89:Yellow:revolving
flavor:90:Light Yellow:rotating


##### Wands #####
# These are finishes, materials, coverings, shapes.

kind:wand:-

flavor:103:Orange:coiled
flavor:104:Slate:pointed
flavor:105:Light Slate:forked
flavor:106:Light Slate:decorative
flavor:107:Light Slate:ornate
flavor:108:Slate:tapered
flavor:109:Blue:knobbed
flavor:110:Light Slate:spiral
flavor:111:Red:streaked
flavor:112:Light Blue:translucent
flavor:113:White:chromed
flavor:114:Light Blue:glassy
flavor:115:Light Blue:crystalline
flavor:116:Light Dark:rubbery
flavor:117:Green:gel covered
flavor:118:Light Slate:metallic
flavor:119:Light Dark:dull black
flavor:120:White:glossy white
flavor:121:White:polished
flavor:122:White:silvery
flavor:123:Red:rusty metal
flavor:124:Light Slate:cracked plastic
flavor:125:Light Slate:faded
flavor:126:Light Slate:sighted
flavor:127:Yellow:golden
flavor:128:Slate:tarnished
flavor:129:Blue:blued
flavor:130:White:gleaming
flavor:131:Slate:grayish
flavor:132:Light Slate:knurled
flavor:133:Light Slate:ribbed
flavor:134:White:shiny
flavor:135:Blue:sheathed
flavor:136:Light Slate:angular
flavor:137:Light Slate:smooth

#flavor:138:Yellow:brassy


##### Rods #####
# These are metals

kind:rod:-

flavor:138:Light Blue:Aluminium
flavor:139:Light Dark:Cast Iron
flavor:140:White:Chromium
flavor:141:Light Umber:Copper
flavor:142:Yellow:Gold
flavor:143:Slate:Iron
flavor:144:Light Slate:Magnesium
flavor:145:Light Slate:Molybdenum
flavor:146:Light Umber:Nickel
flavor:147:Red:Rusty Iron
flavor:148:Light Slate:Silver
flavor:149:Light Slate:Steel
flavor:150:Light Slate:Tin
flavor:151:White:Titanium
flavor:152:White:Tungsten
flavor:153:Light Slate:Zirconium
flavor:154:Light Slate:Zinc
flavor:155:Light Blue:Aluminium-Plated
flavor:156:Light Umber:Copper-Plated
flavor:157:Yellow:Engraved Gold
flavor:158:Light Umber:Nickel-Plated
flavor:159:Light Slate:Silver-Gilt
flavor:160:Light Slate:Polished Steel
flavor:161:Light Slate:Tin-Plated
flavor:162:White:White Gold
flavor:163:Light Blue:Mithril-Plated
flavor:164:Light Blue:Mithril
flavor:165:Umber:Runed
flavor:166:Light Umber:Bronze
flavor:167:Light Umber:Brass
flavor:168:White:Platinum
flavor:169:Red:Rusted Steel
flavor:170:Slate:Lead-Plated
flavor:171:White:Ivory
flavor:172:Slate:Pewter

# Wrought Iron

##### Mushrooms #####
# These are 'textures'

kind:mushroom:,

flavor:173:Light Purple:Spotted
flavor:174:Light Dark:Rubbery
flavor:175:Mustard:Crumbly
flavor:176:Light Yellow:Moldy
flavor:177:Blue:Mottled
flavor:178:Green:Firm
flavor:179:Mud:Woody
flavor:180:Yellow:Wrinkled
flavor:181:Light Slate:Furry
flavor:182:Light Red:Fragile
flavor:183:Slate:Marbled
flavor:184:Light Blue:Gelatinous
flavor:185:Light Green:Speckled
flavor:186:Violet:Glowing
flavor:187:Red:Striped
flavor:188:Slate:Slimy
flavor:189:Deep Light Blue:Moist
flavor:190:White:Withered
flavor:191:White:Waxy
flavor:192:Umber:Smelly

# Fleshy
# Fuzzy
# Luminescent
# Blotchy
# Leathery
# Rotting

##### Pills #####
# These are two part names to be combined at random

kind:pill:'

flavor:193:Magenta-Pink:exprod|one
flavor:194:Magenta-Pink:yucc|ine
flavor:195:Magenta-Pink:degout|ate
flavor:196:Magenta-Pink:plonc|ane
flavor:197:Magenta-Pink:amaud|ine
flavor:198:Magenta-Pink:hedley|ite
flavor:199:Magenta-Pink:metod|ine
flavor:200:Magenta-Pink:rokod|ine
flavor:201:Magenta-Pink:yadar|o-x
flavor:202:Magenta-Pink:panax|a-plus
flavor:203:Magenta-Pink:soyleng|in
flavor:204:Magenta-Pink:awsymm|ene
flavor:205:Magenta-Pink:mutat|o-z
flavor:206:Magenta-Pink:kewl|a-max
flavor:207:Magenta-Pink:poppet|ol
flavor:208:Magenta-Pink:sigar|enol
flavor:209:Magenta-Pink:dextros|ole
flavor:210:Magenta-Pink:herpet|al
flavor:211:Magenta-Pink:deridit|ide
flavor:212:Magenta-Pink:donprig|ine
flavor:213:Magenta-Pink:fidell|enal
flavor:214:Magenta-Pink:amazbal|yne
flavor:215:Magenta-Pink:tufez|a
flavor:216:Magenta-Pink:krizmat|on
flavor:217:Magenta-Pink:bran|ine
flavor:218:Magenta-Pink:tulaz|ine
flavor:219:Magenta-Pink:tuhogas|ane
flavor:220:Magenta-Pink:cralmal|eol
flavor:221:Magenta-Pink:parakax|ine
flavor:222:Magenta-Pink:transfar|ac
flavor:223:Magenta-Pink:formot|ra
flavor:224:Magenta-Pink:permak|il
flavor:225:Magenta-Pink:topanan|ine
flavor:226:Magenta-Pink:potat|ine
flavor:227:Magenta-Pink:mopout|in
flavor:228:Magenta-Pink:bleksp|ine
flavor:229:Magenta-Pink:ewick|one
flavor:230:Magenta-Pink:caram|ate
flavor:231:Magenta-Pink:barm|ine
flavor:232:Magenta-Pink:pixill|in
flavor:233:Magenta-Pink:metabal|ol
flavor:234:Magenta-Pink:chrysoph|ene
flavor:235:Magenta-Pink:tidal|aol
flavor:236:Magenta-Pink:gargal|ine
flavor:237:Magenta-Pink:becalp|in
flavor:238:Magenta-Pink:mateng|ane
flavor:239:Magenta-Pink:poletn|ate
flavor:240:Magenta-Pink:layak|anol
flavor:241:Magenta-Pink:banan|adine
flavor:242:Magenta-Pink:stanfor|imine

##### Cards #####

# Card names are generated from randomly combined buzzwords

kind:card:-

flavor:243:Deep Light Blue:Pep|Disrupt
flavor:244:Deep Light Blue:Laser|Rescue
flavor:245:Deep Light Blue:Light|4U
flavor:246:Deep Light Blue:Mind|Spin
flavor:247:Deep Light Blue:Adjust|Climber
flavor:248:Deep Light Blue:Detona|Clone
flavor:249:Deep Light Blue:Fire|Pocket
flavor:250:Deep Light Blue:Pyro|Socket
flavor:251:Deep Light Blue:Rev|Bodge
flavor:252:Deep Light Blue:Speedy|Max
flavor:253:Deep Light Blue:Net|Wumpus
flavor:254:Deep Light Blue:Ulti|Run
flavor:255:Deep Light Blue:KEWL|ware
flavor:256:Deep Light Blue:Zap|extra
flavor:257:Deep Light Blue:Cyber|plus
flavor:258:Deep Light Blue:info|Share
flavor:259:Deep Light Blue:Data|way
flavor:260:Deep Light Blue:Expert|Jet
flavor:261:Deep Light Blue:Net|flyer
flavor:262:Deep Light Blue:techno|surfer
flavor:263:Deep Light Blue:Pro|perfect
flavor:264:Deep Light Blue:Go|deck
flavor:265:Deep Light Blue:Power|Works
flavor:266:Deep Light Blue:Alpha|Track
flavor:267:Deep Light Blue:Gold|Clue
flavor:268:Deep Light Blue:Micro|lux
flavor:269:Deep Light Blue:Active|Suite
flavor:270:Deep Light Blue:Mega|stream
flavor:271:Deep Light Blue:Giga|gate
flavor:272:Deep Light Blue:tera|path
flavor:273:Deep Light Blue:Visual|system
flavor:274:Deep Light Blue:Easy|Magic
flavor:275:Deep Light Blue:Simple|Impact
flavor:276:Deep Light Blue:Nova|Lite
flavor:277:Deep Light Blue:Quick|boost
flavor:278:Deep Light Blue:Turbo|byte
flavor:279:Deep Light Blue:Master|leap
flavor:280:Deep Light Blue:Star|flight
flavor:281:Deep Light Blue:Multi|Dream
flavor:282:Deep Light Blue:Inter|Matic
flavor:283:Deep Light Blue:Digi|Flash
flavor:284:Deep Light Blue:Elite|Wise
flavor:285:Deep Light Blue:Infini|Smart
flavor:286:Deep Light Blue:Simple|Creator
flavor:287:Deep Light Blue:Cyber|Chewer
flavor:288:Deep Light Blue:Super|Plus
flavor:289:Deep Light Blue:Ultra|Con
flavor:290:Deep Light Blue:Auto|Zap
flavor:291:Deep Light Blue:Rocket|Line
flavor:292:Deep Light Blue:Idio|Box
flavor:293:Deep Light Blue:Flashy|Lemming
flavor:294:Deep Light Blue:Shiny|Blocks
flavor:295:Deep Light Blue:Gloss|Bridge
flavor:296:Deep Light Blue:Intra|Defense
flavor:297:Deep Light Blue:Entro|Shield
flavor:298:Deep Light Blue:Rapid|Ex
flavor:299:Deep Light Blue:Fast|Extend
flavor:300:Deep Light Blue:Logi|Star
flavor:301:Deep Light Blue:Think|Words
flavor:302:Deep Light Blue:Brain|Storm
flavor:303:Deep Light Blue:Total|Roll
flavor:304:Deep Light Blue:Clean|Swing
# |Wipe
# |Pack
# |Stretch
# |Mission
