{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\deflang1031{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}}
\viewkind4\uc1\pard\fs17 \page #{\footnote a0_general}${\footnote General Information}+{\footnote a0_general:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b General Information\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Angband is basically a complex single player dungeon simulation.  A player creates a character, choosing from a variety of sexes, races and classes, and then "runs" that character over a period of days, weeks, even months.
\par 
\par The player will begin his adventure on the town level where he may acquire supplies, weapons, armor, and magical devices by bartering with various shop owners.  Then the player can descend into the Pits of Angband, where he will explore the many levels of the dungeon, gaining experience by killing fierce creatures, collecting powerful objects and valuable treasure, and returning to town occasionally to barter for new supplies.  Eventually, as the player grows more experienced, he may attempt to win the game by defeating Morgoth, the Lord of Darkness, who resides far below the surface.
\par 
\par Note that Angband is a very complex game, and it may be difficult to grasp everything at first, especially if you have never played a "roguelike" game before.  You should probably browse through all of the "online help files", especially this one, before beginning any serious adventuring...
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote b0_birth}${\footnote Creating a Character}+{\footnote b0_birth:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Creating a Character\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Angband is a roleplaying game, in which you, the player, control a character in the world of Angband.  Perhaps the most important thing you control is the birth of your character, in which you choose or allow to be chosen various attributes that will affect the future life of your character.
\par 
\par Character creation, or birth, is controlled through a variety of choices as to constraints on the type of character you wish to play, followed by a series of random calculations to generate ("roll up") a random character matching the appropriate constraints.
\par 
\par Once your character has been generated, you will be given the choice to generate a new character obeying the same constraints, and once you have generated more than one character, you can switch back and forth between the two most recent characters, until you are presented with a personality that you feel comfortable with.
\par 
\par You may start the entire process over at any time.
\par 
\par Once you have accepted a character you will asked to provide a name for the character.  In general, the actual choice of a name is not important, but do keep in mind that it may have some effect on the game itself.  For example, on some machines, the character name determines the filename that will be used to save the character to disk.  On others, the character name specifies special "pref" files.  And the character name is used on the high score list.
\par \b 
\par \lang1031\b0\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote c0_dungeon}${\footnote Exploring the Dungeon}+{\footnote c0_dungeon:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Exploring the Dungeon\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 After you have created your character, you will begin your Angband adventure.  Symbols appearing on your screen will represent the dungeon's walls, floor, objects, features, and creatures lurking about.  In order to direct your character through his adventure, you will enter single character commands.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote d0_attack}${\footnote Attacking Monsters}+{\footnote d0_attack:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Attacking Monsters\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Attacking is simple in Angband.  If you move into a creature, you attack him.  You can attack from a distance by firing a missile or by magical means (such as aiming a wand).  Creatures attack in the same way.  If they move into you, they attack you.  Some creatures can also cast spells from a distance, and others can use various breath weapons (such as fire) on you from a distance.
\par 
\par Creatures in walls can not be attacked by wands or other magic attacks normally stopped by walls, nor can they be shot at with bows and arrows.  Tunnelling into the wall (using the "tunnel" or "alter" command) will allow you to attack any creature in the wall. This applies to creatures which "pass through" walls: if they "bore through" walls, the wall is no longer there, and the creature can be targeted normally.
\par 
\par If you are wielding a weapon, the damage for the weapon is used when you hit a creature.  Otherwise you get a single punch which does minimal damage.
\par 
\par You may "w"ield one weapon for melee combat, and also one missile launcher (bow, crossbow or sling.) You may also wear one amulet (around the one and only neck of the character), two rings (on the two "ring" fingers, i.e. the third finger of each hand: a magic ring does not function when worn on any other finger, nor may two be worn on the same finger), one light source, and a full set of armor - body armor, shield, helmet, gloves, boots and a cloak. Any or all of these items may provide powers to the character in terms of bonuses to-hit, to-damage, to-armor class, or to other stats (in the latter case, a single numerical bonus applies to all affected stats.)
\par  
\par Firing a missile (while wielding the appropriate launcher) is the only way to get the "full" power out of the missile.  You may of course throw an arrow at a monster without shooting it, but you will find the effects will not be what you had hoped.
\par 
\par Hits and misses are determined by ability to hit versus armor class.  A hit is a strike that does some damage; a miss may in fact reach a target, but fails to do any damage.  Higher armor classes make it harder to do damage, and so lead to more misses; they also reduce the damage from a strike that actually occurs.
\par  
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote e0_playing}${\footnote Playing the Game}+{\footnote e0_playing:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Playing the Game\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Most of your interaction with Angband will take the form of \i commands\i0 .  Every Angband command consists of an \i underlying command\i0  plus a variety of optional or required arguments, such as a repeat count, a direction, or the index of an inventory object.  Commands are normally specified by typing a series of keypresses, from which the underlying command is extracted, along with any encoded arguments.  You may choose how the standard \i keyboard keys \i0 are mapped to the underlying commands by choosing one of the two standard \i keysets\i0 , the \i original\i0  keyset or the \i roguelike\i0  keyset.
\par 
\par The original keyset is very similar to the \i underlying\i0  command set, with a few additions (such as the ability to use the numeric directions to walk or the 5 key to stay still).  The roguelike keyset provides similar additions, and also allows the use of the h/j/k/l/y/u/b/n keys to walk (or, in combination with the shift or control keys, to run or alter), which thus requires a variety of key mappings to allow access to the underlying commands used for walking/running/altering.  In particular, the roguelike keyset includes many more \i capital\i0  and \i control\i0  keys, as shown below.
\par 
\par Note that any keys that are not required for access to the underlying command set may be used by the user to extend the \i keyset \i0 which is being used, by defining new \i keymaps\i0 .  To avoid the use of any keymaps, press backslash ("\\") plus the underlying command key.  This is normally only used in \i macro \i0 definitions.  You may enter control-keys as a caret ("^")
\par plus the key (so "^" + "p" yields "^P").
\par 
\par Some commands allow an optional \i repeat count\i0 , which allows you to tell the game that you wish to do the command multiple times, unless you press a key or are otherwise disturbed.  To enter a repeat count, type '0', followed by the numerical count, followed by the command.  You must type "space" before entering certain commands.  Skipping the numerical count yields a count of 99.  An option allows certain commands (open, disarm, alter, etc) to auto-repeat.
\par 
\par Some commands will prompt for extra information, such as a direction, an inventory or equipment item, a spell, a textual inscription, the symbol of a monster race, a sub-command, a verification, an amount of time, a quantity, a file name, or various other things.  Normally you can hit return to choose the default response, or escape to cancel the command entirely.
\par 
\par Some commands will prompt for a spell or an inventory item.  Pressing space (or '*') will give you a list of choices.  Pressing "-" (minus) selects the item on the floor.  Pressing a lowercase letter selects the given item.  Pressing a capital letter selects the given item after verification.  Pressing a numeric digit '#' selects the first item (if any) whose inscription contains "@#" or "@x#", where "x" is the current "underlying command".  You may only specify items which are "legal" for the command.  Whenever an item inscription contains "!*" or "!x" (with "x" as above) you must verify its selection.
\par 
\par Some commands will prompt for a direction.  You may enter a compass direction using any of the direction keys shown below.  Sometimes, you may specify that you wish to use the current target, by pressing "t" or "5", or that you wish to select a new target, by pressing "*" (see "Target" below).
\par 
\par \f1 Original Keyset Directions       Roguelike Keyset Directions
\par 
\par          7  8  9                           y  k  u
\par          4     6                           h     l
\par          1  2  3                           b  j  n\f0 
\par 
\par Each of the standard keysets provides some short-cuts over the underlying commands.  For example, both keysets allow you to walk by simply pressing an original direction key (or a roguelike direction key if you are using the roguelike keyset), instead of using the walk command plus a direction.  The roguelike keyset allows you to run or alter by simply holding the shift or control modifier key down while pressing a roguelike direction key, instead of using the run or alter command plus a direction.  Both keysets allow the use of the "5" key to stand still, which is most convenient when using the original keyset.
\par 
\par Note that on many systems, it is possible to define macros to various keys, or key combinations, so that it is often possible to make macros which, for example, allow the use of the shift and/or control modifier keys, plus a numeric keypad key, to specify the run or alter command, with the given direction, regardless of any keymap definitions, by using the fact that you can always, for example, use "\\" + "." + "6", to specify "run east".
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par \b 
\par \lang1031\b0\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f0_command}${\footnote Command Descriptions}+{\footnote f0_command:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Command Descriptions\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 The following command descriptions are listed as the command name plus the "underlying command" key.  This is followed by the command name and "roguelike" keyset key, if different from the underlying command key.  Then comes a brief description of the command, including information about alternative methods of specifying the command in each keyset, when needed.
\par 
\par Some commands use the "repeat count" to automatically repeat the command several times, while others use the "repeat count" to specify a "quantity" for the command, and still others use it as an "argument" of some kind.  Some commands are auto-repeated several times if no repeat count is given and the "always_repeat" option is set.
\par 
\par Most commands take no "energy" to perform, while most other commands only take energy when they cause the world to change in some way.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g0_option}${\footnote Option Descriptions}+{\footnote g0_option:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Option Descriptions\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Most of the "options" are accessible through the '=' command, which provides an interface to the various "sets" of options available to the player.
\par 
\par In the decriptions below, each option is listed as the textual summary which is shown on the "options" screen, plus the internal name of the option in brackets, followed by a textual description of the option.
\par 
\par Note that the internal name of the option can be used in user pref files to force the option to a given setting, see "command.txt" for more info.
\par 
\par Various concepts are mentioned in the descriptions below, including "disturb" (cancel any running, resting, or repeated commands, which are in progress), "flush" (forget any keypresses waiting in the keypress queue, including any macros in progress), "fresh" (dump any pending output to the screen), and "sub-windows" (see below).
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote h0_version}${\footnote Version Information}+{\footnote h0_version:1}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Version Information\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 These files were last updated for Angband 3.0.1.
\par 
\par Make sure to read the newsgroup {\uldb rec.games.roguelike.angband}{\v !JumpID()} and to visit the {\uldb Official Angband Home Page}{\v !JumpID()} for the most up to date information about Angband.
\par 
\par Angband 3.0.1 has an incredibly complex history, and is the result of a lot of work by a lot of people, all of whom have contributed their time and energy for free, being rewarded only by the pleasure of keeping alive one of the best freeware games available anywhere.
\par 
\par The version control files, if they existed, would span more than ten years time, and more than six different primary developers.  Without such files, we must rely on simpler methods, such as change logs, source file diffs, and word of mouth.  Some of this information is summarized in these files.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par \b 
\par \lang1031\b0\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote a1_general}${\footnote A Note from the Maintainer}+{\footnote a0_general:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b A Note from the Maintainer\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Welcome to Angband!
\par 
\par My name is Robert Ruehlmann, and I have been the maintainer of Angband since April 2000.  I have been responsible for many improvements to the game over the past few years, and I have many more planned for the future.
\par 
\par Angband is available for almost every known system (including Unix, Macintosh, Amiga, Linux, Windows, DOS, Solaris, OS/2, RISC OS, etc).  It is written in C, and the source code is freely available.  Creating a version for a new platform involves writing as few as 100 lines of code and recompiling.
\par 
\par See the {\uldb Official Angband Home Page}{\v !JumpID()} at {\uldb www.thangorodrim.net}{\v !JumpID()} for up to date information about the latest version of Angband, including a complete list of recent modifications.
\par 
\par You can email compliments, complaints, suggestions, bug reports, and patches to me at {\uldb rr9@thangorodrim.net}{\v !JumpID()}, and you can post interesting experiences and basic questions to the newsgroup {\uldb rec.games.roguelike.angband}{\v !JumpID()}.
\par 
\par You may freely distribute the game, and its source, though you are bound not only by the existing copyright notice from 1984, but also whatever restrictions may be present on various other pieces of the code, including the fact that any source written by me is technically automatically placed under copyright and may thus not be used for commercial purposes.  Remember to read the "{\uldb version.txt}{\v !JumpID(>Main,h0_version)}" help file for some more copyright information.
\par 
\par The basic help files supplied with this game are more or less up to date, but when in doubt, you should ask the newsgroup for confirmation.
\par 
\par Remember to tell all your friends about how much you like Angband...
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote a2_general}${\footnote A Quick Demonstration}+{\footnote a0_general:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b A Quick Demonstration\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Angband is, as mentioned above, a very complex game, so you may want to try the following quick demonstration.  The following instructions are for demonstration purposes only, and so they are intentionally boring.
\par 
\par For this demo, I will assume that you have never played Angband before, that you have not requested any special sub-windows, that you have not requested any special graphics modes, that you have a numeric keypad on your computer, and that you are using the default options, including, in particular, the original command set.  If any of these assumptions are incorrect, you will need to keep in mind that this demo may not work.  There are many ways to view this file while playing, in particular, you should be able to view it using the "online help" built into the game.
\par 
\par Any time you see the "\f1 -more-\f0 " prompt, read the message and press space.  This takes precedence over any other instructions.  At any other prompt, for example, if you accidentally hit a key, you can normally cancel the action in progress by pressing escape.
\par 
\par When the game starts up, depending on what platform you are using, you may be taken directly to the character creation screen, or you may have to ask to create a new character.  In either case, you will be shown the character information screen, and you will be asked a series of questions.  For this demo, press "a" three times to select a "female human warrior" character.  Then press "n" when asked about preserve mode and maximize mode, and when asked if you wish to use the autoroller.  You will now be presented with a description of your character.  Look over the description briefly, there is a lot of information here, and most of it will not make any sense.  Press escape three times and your character will be placed into the town.
\par 
\par You should now be looking at the basic dungeon interaction screen.  To the left is some information about your character.  To the right is an overhead view of the town.  Nothing happens in Angband while the game is waiting for you to specify a command, so take a good look at the town.  You will see a variety of symbols on the screen.  Each symbol normally represents a terrain feature, an object, or a monster.  The "\f1 @\f0 " symbol is special, it represents your character.  You can use the "/" command to find out what a given symbol represents.  Press "/" plus "@" now to verify the meaning of the "\f1 @\f0 " symbol.
\par 
\par The "\f1 #\f0 " symbols around the edge of the town represent the walls that surround the the town.  The "\f1 #\f0 " symbols arranged in large rectangles represent stores.  The numeric symbols represent an entrance to a store.  The "\f1 .\f0 " symbols represent floor grids which are illuminated.  It is currently daytime, so most of the town should consist of stores and illuminated floor grids.
\par 
\par Any alphabetic symbols always represent monsters, where the word "monsters" specifies a wide variety of entities, including people, animals, plants, etc.  Only a few races of monsters normally appear in town, and all of them are relatively harmless.  The most common monsters in town are small animals (cats and dogs) and townspeople (merchants, mercenaries, miscreants, etc).
\par 
\par Now use the "l" command to look around.  This will cause the cursor to be moved onto each "interesting" grid that can be seen by your character, one at a time, giving you a description of that grid.  The cursor always starts on the grid containing your character.  In this case, you will see a message telling you that your character is standing on a staircase.  Keep pressing space until the prompt goes away.  Note that your character can only see a subset of the things which are actually displayed on the screen.
\par 
\par Now press "i", to display your character's inventory.  All new characters start out with some objects to help them survive.  Your character will have some food, a potion, some torches, some chain mail, and a sword.  Press "w" to wield/wear something.  Observe that the inventory listing is reduced to those objects which can actually be wielded or worn.  Press "d" to wear the chain mail, and then press "i" again.  Note that the chain mail is no longer shown in the inventory, and the sword has moved up in the listing.
\par 
\par Now press "e" to see your equipment.  Your character has twelve slots for equipment, including slots for a weapon, a bow, two rings, an amulet, a light, some armor, a cloak, a shield, a helmet, some gloves, and some boots.  Press "t" to take something off.  Note that the equipment listing is reduced to those objects which can actually be taken off.  Press "g" to take off the chain mail, and then press "e" again.  Note that the chain mail is no longer shown in the equipment.  Press escape.
\par 
\par Now press "w" + "d" to wear your armor again.  Note that you do not have to look at the inventory before using the "w" command.  Press "w" + "d" to wield your sword.  Press "w" + "c" to hold up a lit torch and hold it aloft.
\par 
\par Monsters can only move after you use a command which takes energy from your character.  So far, you have used the "w" and "t" commands, which take energy, and the "e", "i", "l", and "/" commands, which are free commands, and so do not take any energy.  In general, the only commands which take energy are the ones which require your character to perform some action in the world of the game, such as moving around, attacking monsters, and interacting with objects.
\par 
\par If there were any monsters near your character while you were experimenting with the "w" and "t" commands, you may have seen them move or even attack your character.  Although unlikely, it is even possible that your character has already been killed.  This is the only way to lose the game.  So if you have already lost, simply exit the game and restart this demo.
\par 
\par One of the most important things that your character can do is move around.  Use the numeric keys on the keypad to make your character move around.  The "4", "6", "8", and "2" keys move your character west, east, north, and south, and the "7", "9", "1" and "3" keys move your character diagonally.  When your character first moves, observe the "\f1 >\f0 " symbol that is left behind.  This is the "staircase" that she was standing on earlier in the demo.
\par 
\par Attempting to stay away from monsters, try and move your character towards the entrance to the general store, which is represented as a "\f1 1\f0 " on the screen.  As your character moves around, use the "l" command to look around.  You can press escape at any time to cancel the looking.  If you die, start over.  As you get close to the general store, your character will be able to see the entrance.  Note that you can see the entrance no matter where your character is, but your character cannot see it unless she is close to it, and there are no walls between her and the entrance.
\par 
\par One of the hardest things for people to get used to, when playing games of this nature for the first time, is that the character is not the same as the player.  The player presses keys, and looks at a computer screen, while the character performs complex actions, and interacts with a virtual world.  The player decides what the character should do, and tells her to do it, and the character then performs the actions.  These actions may induce some changes in the virtual world.  Some of these changes may be apparent to the character, and information about the changes is then made available to the player by a variety of methods, including messages, character state changes, or visual changes to the screen.  Some changes may only be apparent to the player.
\par 
\par There are also a whole set of things that the player can do that can not even be described in the virtual world inhabited by the character, such as resize windows, read online help files, modify colormaps, or change options.  Some of these things may even affect the character in abstract ways, for example, the player can request that from now on all monsters know exactly where the character is at all times, or that the character be able to look at things which are on the other side of walls.  Likewise, there are some things that the character does on a regular basis that the player may not even consider, such as digesting food, or searching for traps while running down a hallway.
\par 
\par To make matters worse, as you get used to the difference between the player and the character, it becomes so obvious that you start to ignore it.  At that point, you find yourself merging the player and the character in your mind, and you find yourself saying things like "So yesterday, I was at my friend's house, and I stayed up late playing Angband, and I was attacked by some wild dogs, and I got killed by a demon, but I made it to the high score list", in which the pronoun changes back and forth from the real world to the virtual one several times in the same sentence.  So, from this point on you may have to separate the player and the character for yourself.
\par 
\par So anyway, keep walking towards the entrance to the general store until you actually walk into it.  At this point, the screen should change to the store interaction screen.  You will see the name of the shop-keeper, and the name of the shop, and a list of objects which are available.  If there are more than twelve different objects, you can use the space key to advance to the next page of objects.  Hopefully, when you arrive, the general store will be selling some flasks of oil.  If so, press the "p" key to purchase some oil, and when asked which item you want, press the letter shown to the left of the flasks of oil.  If you are asked how many you want, just hit return.  Any time you are asked a question and there is already something under the cursor, pressing return will accept that choice.  You will then see a few messages describing the transaction, as always, hit space at each "\f1 -more-\f0 " prompt, and eventually you will be asked to make an offer for the flask of oil.  Hit return to accept the price.  Many commands work inside the store, for example, use the "i" command to see your inventory, with the new flask of oil.  Note that your inventory is always kept sorted in a semi-logical order, so the indexes of some of the objects may change as your inventory changes.
\par 
\par Purchase a few more flasks of oil, if possible, this time, when asked how many you want, press "3" plus return to buy three flasks at once.  Flasks of oil are very important for low level characters, because not only can they be used to fuel a lantern (which gives more light than a torch), but also, they can be ignited and thrown at monsters from a distance.  So it is often a good idea to have a few extra flasks of oil.  Press escape to leave the store.  If you want, take time to visit the rest of the stores.  One of the buildings, marked with an "\f1 8\f0 ", is your "home", and is not a real store.
\par 
\par Now move to the staircase, represented by the "\f1 >\f0 " symbol, and press ">", to go down the stairs.  At this point, you are in the dungeon.  Use the "l" command to look around.  Note that you are standing on a staircase leading back to town.  Use the "<" command to take the stairs back to town.  Now use the ">" command to go back down the stairs into the dungeon.  You are now in a different part of the dungeon than you were in before.  The dungeon is so huge, once you leave one part of the dungeon, you will never find it again.
\par 
\par Now look the screen.  Your character may be in a lit room, represented as a large rectangle of illuminated floor grids ("\f1 .\f0 "), surrounded by walls ("\f1 #\f0 ").  If you are not in a lit room, keep going back up to the town and back down into the dungeon until you are.  Now look around.  You may see some closed doors ("\f1 +\f0 ") or some open doors ("\f1 `\f0 '") or some holes ("\f1 .\f0 ") in the walls which surround the room.  If you do not, keep playing the stairway game until you are in such a room.  This will keep the demo simple.
\par 
\par Now look around using the "l" command.  You may see some monsters and/or some objects in the room with you.  You may see some stairs up ("\f1 <\f0 ") or some stairs down ("\f1 >\f0 ").  If you see any monsters, move up next to the monster, using the movement keys, and then try and move into the monster.  This will cause you to attack the monster.  Keep moving into the monster until you kill the monster, or it runs away, or you die.  If you die, start a new game.  If the monster runs away, ignore it, or chase it, but do not leave the room.  Once all the monsters in the room are dead or gone, walk on top of any objects in the room.  This will cause you to pick up the object.  If there are any closed doors ("\f1 +\f0 ") in the room walk up next to them and press "o" and then the direction key which would move you into the door, which should attempt to "open" the door.
\par 
\par Now use the movement keys to explore the dungeon.  As you leave the room, you will probably notice that your character cannot see nearly as far as she could in the room.  Also, you will notice that as she moves around, the screen keeps displaying some of the grids that your character has seen.  Think of this as a kind of "map" superimposed on the world itself, the player can see the entire map, but the character can only see those parts of the world which are actually nearby.  If the character gets near the edge of the map portion of the screen the entire map will scroll to show a new portion of the world.  Only about ten percent of the dungeon level can be seen by the player at one time, but you can use the "L" command to look at other pieces of the map.  Use the "." key, plus a direction, to run through the dungeon.  Use the "R" key, plus return, to force your character to rest until she has recovered from any damage she incurs while attacking monsters.  Use the "M" key to see the entire dungeon level at once, and hit escape when done.  If your food rations are still at index "a" in your inventory, press "E" + "a" to eat some food.  If your oil is still at index "b" in your inventory, and there is a monster, for example, directly to the east, press "v" + "b" + "6" to throw a flask of oil at the monster.  To drop an item from your inventory, press "d" plus the index of that item.  You can use the "^X" key to quit and save the game.
\par 
\par You now know enough to play a quick game of Angband.  There is a lot more for you to learn, including how to interpret information about your character, how to create different kinds of characters, how to determine which equipment to wield/wear, how to use various kinds of objects, and how to use the more than fifty different commands available to your character.  The best resource for learning these things is the online help, which include, among other things, a complete list of all commands available to your player, and a list of all the symbols which you may encounter in the dungeon, and information about creating new characters.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote h1_version}${\footnote Brief Version History}+{\footnote h0_version:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Brief Version History\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 First came "VMS Moria", by Robert Alan Koeneke (1985).
\par 
\par Then came "Umoria" (Unix Moria), by James E. Wilson (1989).
\par 
\par Details about the history of the various flavors of Moria, the direct ancestor to Angband, can be found elsewhere, and a note from Robert Alan Koeneke is included in this file.  Note that Moria has been ported to a variety of platforms, and has its own newsgroup, and its own fans.
\par 
\par In 1990, Alex Cutler and Andy Astrand, with the help of other students at the University of Warwick, created Angband 1.0, based on the existing code for Umoria 5.2.1.  They wanted to expand the game, keeping or even strengthening the grounding in Tolkien lore, while adding more monsters and items, including unique monsters and artifact items, plus activation, pseudo-sensing, level feelings, and special dungeon rooms.
\par 
\par Over time, Sean Marsh, Geoff Hill, Charles Teague, and others, worked on the source, releasing a copy known as Angband 2.4.frog_knows at some point, which ran only on Unix systems, but which was ported by various people to various other systems.  One of the most significant ports was the PC Angband 1.4 port, for old DOS machines, which added color and various other significant changes, only some of which ever made it back into the official source.
\par 
\par Then {\uldb Charles Swiger}{\v !JumpID()} took over, sometime in late 1993, cleaning up the code, fixing a lot of bugs, and bringing together various patches from various people, resulting in several versions of Angband, starting with Angband 2.5.1 (?), and leading up to the release of Angband 2.6.1 (and Angband 2.6.2) in late 1994.  Some of the changes during this period were based on suggestions from the "net", and from various related games, including UMoria 5.5, PC Angband 1.4, and FAngband.
\par 
\par Angband 2.6.1 was primarily targetted towards Unix/NeXT machines, and it required the use of the low level "curses" commands for all screen manipulation and keypress interaction.  Each release had to be ported from scratch to any new platforms, normally by creating visual display code that acted as a "curses" emulator.  One such port was Macintosh Angband 2.6.1, by Keith Randall, which added support for color, and which formed the basis for the first release of Angband 2.7.0.
\par 
\par During the last half of 1994, Ben Harrison had been playing with the Angband source, primarily to investigate the possibility of making some kind of automatic player for Angband, like the old rogue-o-matic program for the game Rogue.  The difficulty of compiling a version for the Macintosh, and the complexity of the code, prevented this, and so Ben began cleaning up the code in various ways for his personal use.
\par 
\par In late 1994, Charles Swiger announced that he was starting a real job and would no longer be able to be the Angband maintainer.  This induced some amount of uproar in the Angband community (as represented by the Angband newsgroup), with various people attempting to form committees to take over the maintenance of Angband.  Since committees have never given us anything but trouble (think COBOL), there was very little resistance when, on the first day of 1995, Ben made his code available, calling it Angband 2.7.0 and by default taking over as the new maintainer of Angband.
\par 
\par Angband 2.7.0 was a very clean (but very buggy) rewrite that, among other things, allowed extremely simple porting to multiple platforms, starting with Unix and Macintosh, and by the time most of the bugs were cleaned up, in Angband 2.7.2, including X11, and various IBM machines.  Angband 2.7.4 was released to the ftp.cis.ksu.edu site, and quickly gained acceptance, perhaps helped by the OS2 and Windows and Amiga and Linux ports.  Angband 2.7.5 and 2.7.6 added important capabilities such as macros and user pref files, and continued to clean up the source.  Angband 2.7.8 was released to the major ftp archives as the first "stable" version in a year or so, with new help files and spoiler files for the online help, plus a variety of minor tweaks and some new features.
\par 
\par After Angband 2.7.8 was released, Ben created a web site to keep track of all the changes made in each version (though a few may have been missed), and acquired the use of a new develoepement ftp server to supplement the official mirror server.  This web site is now permanently located at the {\uldb Official Angband Home Page}{\v !JumpID()}.  Unfortunately, the next six versions were numbered Angband 2.7.9v1 to Angband 2.7.9v6, but really each were rather major updates.  Angband 2.8.0 and 2.8.1 were released using a more normal version scheme.  Angband 2.8.2 and 2.8.3 add a few random features, clean up some code, and provide graphics support and such for a few more platforms.
\par 
\par After the release of Angband 2.8.3 Ben's free time was more and more occupied by his work.  He released a beta version of Angband 2.8.5, introducing many new features, but couldn't give as much attention to maintaining the game as he wanted to.  Meanwhile, an unofficial version by Robert Ruehlmann, incorporating three popular patches (the "Easy Patch" by Tim Baker, for opening doors and disarming traps without specifying the direction: Greg Wooledge's "Random Artifacts" patch: and Keldon Jones's "Optional Monster AI Improvement"), named 2.8.3h, was gaining popularity.
\par 
\par So in March 2000, Robert Ruehlmann offered to take over Angband and started to fix the remaining bugs in the Angband 2.8.5 beta.  The resulting version was to be released as Angband 2.9.0. Further bugfixes and a couple of new features - including many in the realms of user-customizability, with greater control over ego-items, player races and classes, monsters, items and artifacts - have led to the current version.
\par 
\par And with the greater amount of user-customizability that is now possible, it was inevitable that SOMEBODY would eventually go and actually do something with it.  Jonathan Ellis started customizing the user-editable text files in the "edit" directory for his own personal use - originally, only by fixing bugs and inconsistencies (less powerful monsters being worth more experience per kill than more powerful ones, dragons doing a decent amount of damage in melee, monsters with two claws and one mouth getting one claw and three bite attacks, and so on).  
\par 
\par At first, this was all that could really be done with it: adding new monsters and items was impossible, as the limits were fixed. And so only three new monsters made an appearance, each of them replacing an existing monster in the order: and one new artifact - "The Palantir of Westernesse".  Gameplay balance could be tweaked somewhat, by changing the level, power and rarity of certain items and monsters: and some changes were made, mostly with the attempt to reduce the notorious "triple whammy" effect of needing poison, confusion and nether resistance (or over 550 hps, if without nether resistance) all at once, straight after passing 2000', forcing excessive scumming before this depth or risking unavoidable instant death: and then having nothing left to do but dive straight to 4000' and scum for speed items, missing out on some of the most interesting depths of the dungeon.  This problem, at least, could be addressed, but actual new things were less easy to add...
\par 
\par That all changed with Angband 2.9.1, which for the first time moved the limits themselves to a separate user-editable file, and allowed more monsters and items to be created without removing the old ones. At the same time, a patch by Matthias Kurzke was incorporated which allowed the creation of new ego-items.  Various new powers, for the player and monsters, were added to the game - but no items or monsters yet had these powers (resist fear, poison brand, lose charisma, summon greater demons, and so on): indeed, arguably it could be said that the game had not even adjusted properly to Ben Harrison's fractional speed system (Angband 2.7.0) or the addition of the other attack forms such as shards, sound, chaos, nexus and so on (even before Ben.) 
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote h2_version}${\footnote Some of the Changes Between Angband 2.6.1 and Now}+{\footnote h0_version:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Some of the Changes Between Angband 2.6.1 and Now\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 It is very hard to pin down, along the way from 2.6.2 to the current version, exactly what changes were made, and exactly when they were made.  Most releases involved so many changes from the previous release as to make diff files not very useful, since often the diff files are as long as the code itself. Most of the changes, with the notable exception of the creation of some of the new main-xxx.c files for the various new platforms, and a few other minor exceptions generally noted directly in comments in the source, were written by Ben or Robert, either spontaneously, or, more commonly, as the result of a suggestion or comment by an Angband player.
\par 
\par The most important modification was a massive code level cleanup for 2.7.x, largely completed in 2.7.8, that made all other modifications much simpler and safer.  This cleanup was so massive that in many places the code is no longer recognizable, for example, via diff -r, often because it was rewritten from scratch.
\par 
\par The second most important modification was the design of a generic z-term.c package, which allows Angband to be ported to a new machine with as few as 50 lines of code.  Angband 2.9.3 thus runs without modification on many machines, including Macintosh, PowerMac, Unix/X11, Unix/curses, Amiga, Windows, OS2-386, DOS-386, and even DOS-286.
\par 
\par It would be difficult to list all of the changes between Angband 2.6.1 and the current version, because many of them were made in passing during the massive code level cleanup.  Many of the changes are invisible to the user, but still provide increased simplicity and efficiency, and decreased code size, or make other more visable changes possible.  For example, the new project() code that handles all bolts, beams, and balls, the new
\par update_view() code that simplifies line of sight computation, or the new generate() code that builds new levels in the dungeon.  Many changes have been made to increase efficiency, including the new process_monsters() and update_monsters() functions, and the new objdes() and lite_spot() routines.  The generic z-term.c package yielded efficient screen updates, and enabled the efficient use of color. 
\par 
\par The most visible (to ordinary players) changes that happened as a result of Ben Harrison's maintainership were (a) a far greater degree of user-customizability as shown by the info.txt files, (b) the "fractional" speed system, with +10 in the new scheme equalling +1 in old money, and (c) object stacking, the ability to have more than one object in a square: first tried in 2.7.9, completed in 2.8.2.
\par 
\par It should also be pointed out at this point that the far cleaner nature of Ben's code as compared to previous versions has given many other people the opportunity to base code for their own Angband variants on it. And so a plethora of new variants have appeared, many of them far more different from Angband now than Angband ever was from Moria, and yet still based on Ben's coding ideals for Angband.
\par 
\par For Angband 2.9.0, the first few new visible features were a random artifact generator (originally developed from a variant by Greg Wooledge), an option to improve monster AI (believed to have originally started out life in a patch written by Keldon Jones), and a patch to allow easier handling of opening and closing doors and disarming traps (by Tim Baker). For Angband 2.9.1 has also come such things as the ability to increase the size of the editable textfiles and thus the number of monsters, artifacts, items, ego-items and vaults in the game (many new vaults were written by Chris Weisiger, some by others, and the number of vaults in the game at this time was doubled), and much greater customizability of ego-items has become possible thanks to a patch written by Matthias Kurzke. It is also now possible to add new character races to the game, and to edit the shopkeepers with respect to their greed, tolerance of haggling and reactions to the character based on his race. Angband 2.9.2 adds support for poison branded weapons to the game.  Angband 2.9.3 made the character class itself customizable to an extent.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote h3_version}${\footnote A Posting from the Original Author}+{\footnote h0_version:4}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b A Posting from the Original Author\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 From: koeneke@ionet.net (Robert Alan Koeneke)
\par Newsgroups: rec.games.roguelike.angband,rec.games.roguelike.moria
\par Subject: Early history of Moria
\par Date: Wed, 21 Feb 1996 04:20:51 GMT
\par 
\par I had some email show up asking about the origin of Moria, and its relation to Rogue.  So I thought I would just post some text on the early days of Moria.
\par 
\par First of all, yes, I really am the Robert Koeneke who wrote the first Moria.  I had a lot of mail accussing me of pulling their leg and such.  I just recently connected to Internet (yes, I work for a company in the dark ages where Internet is concerned) and was real surprised to find Moria in the news groups...  Angband was an even bigger surprise, since I have never seen it.  I probably spoke to its originator though...  I have given permission to lots of people through the years to enhance, modify, or whatever as long as they freely distributed the results.  I have always been a proponent of sharing games, not selling them.
\par 
\par Anyway...
\par 
\par Around 1980 or 81 I was enrolled in engineering courses at the University of Oklahoma.  The engineering lab ran on a PDP 1170 under an early version of UNIX.  I was always good at computers, so it was natural for me to get to know the system administrators.  They invited me one night to stay and play some games, an early startrek game, The Colossal Cave Adventure (later just 'Adventure'), and late one night, a new dungeon game called 'Rogue'.
\par 
\par So yes, I was exposed to Rogue before Moria was even a gleam in my eye.  In fact, Rogue was directly responsible for millions of hours of play time wasted on Moria and its descendents...
\par 
\par Soon after playing Rogue (and man, was I HOOKED), I got a job in a different department as a student assistant in computers.  I worked on one of the early VAX 11/780's running VMS, and no games were available for it at that time.  The engineering lab got a real geek of an administrator who thought the only purpose of a computer was WORK!  Imagine...  Soooo, no more games, and no more rogue!
\par 
\par This was intolerable!  So I decided to write my own rogue game, Moria Beta 1.0.  I had three languages available on my VMS system.  Fortran IV, PASCAL V1.?, and BASIC.  Since most of the game was string manipulation, I wrote the first attempt at Moria in VMS BASIC, and it looked a LOT like Rogue, at least what I could remember of it.  Then I began getting ideas of how to improve it, how it should work differently, and I pretty much didn't touch it for about a year.
\par 
\par Around 1983, two things happened that caused Moria to be born in its recognizable form.  I was engaged to be married, and the only cure for THAT is to work so hard you can't think about it; and I was enrolled for fall to take an operating systems class in PASCAL.
\par 
\par So, I investigated the new version of VMS PASCAL and found out it had a new feature.  Variable length strings!  Wow...
\par 
\par That summer I finished Moria 1.0 in VMS PASCAL.  I learned more about data structures, optimization, and just plain programming that summer then in all of my years in school.  I soon drew a crowd of devoted Moria players...  All at OU.
\par 
\par I asked Jimmey Todd, a good friend of mine, to write a better character generator for the game, and so the skills and history were born.  Jimmey helped out on many of the functions in the game as well. This would have been about Moria 2.0
\par 
\par In the following two years, I listened a lot to my players and kept making enhancements to the game to fix problems, to challenge them, and to keep them going.  If anyone managed to win, I immediately found out how, and 'enhanced' the game to make it harder.  I once vowed it was 'unbeatable', and a week later a friend of mine beat it!  His character, 'Iggy', was placed into the game as 'The Evil Iggy', and immortalized...  And of course, I went in and plugged up the trick he used to win...
\par 
\par Around 1985 I started sending out source to other universities.  Just before a OU / Texas football clash, I was asked to send a copy to the Univeristy of Texas...  I couldn't resist...  I modified it so that the begger on the town level was 'An OU football fan' and they moved at maximum rate.  They also multiplied at maximum rate...  So the first step you took and woke one up, it crossed the floor increasing to hundreds of them and pounded you into oblivion...  I soon received a call and provided instructions on how to 'de-enhance' the game!
\par 
\par Around 1986 - 87 I released Moria 4.7, my last official release.  I was working on a Moria 5.0 when I left OU to go to work for American Airlines (and yes, I still work there).  Moria 5.0 was a complete rewrite, and contained many neat enhancements, features, you name it.  It had water, streams, lakes, pools, with water monsters.  It had 'mysterious orbs' which could be carried like torches for light but also gave off magical aura's (like protection from fire, or aggrivate monster...).  It had new weapons and treasures...  I left it with the student assistants at OU to be finished, but I guess it soon died on the vine.  As far as I know, that source was lost...
\par 
\par I gave permission to anyone who asked to work on the game.  Several people asked if they could convert it to 'C', and I said fine as long as a complete credit history was maintained, and that it could NEVER be sold, only given.  So I guess one or more of them succeeded in their efforts to rewrite it in 'C'.
\par 
\par I have since received thousands of letters from all over the world from players telling about their exploits, and from administrators cursing the day I was born...  I received mail from behind the iron curtain (while it was still standing) talking about the game on VAX's (which supposedly couldn't be there due to export laws).  I used to have a map with pins for every letter I received, but I gave up on that!
\par 
\par I am very happy to learn my creation keeps on going...  I plan to download it and Angband and play them...  Maybe something has been added that will surprise me!  That would be nice...  I never got to play Moria and be surprised...
\par 
\par Robert Alan Koeneke
\par koeneke@ionet.net
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote h4_version}${\footnote Previous Versions (Outdated)}+{\footnote h0_version:5}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Previous Versions (Outdated)\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 VMS Moria Version 4.8
\par Version 0.1: 03/25/83
\par Version 1.0: 05/01/84
\par Version 2.0: 07/10/84
\par Version 3.0: 11/20/84
\par Version 4.0: 01/20/85
\par 
\par Modules:
\par V1.0  
\par Dungeon Generator - RAK
\par Character Generator - RAK & JWT
\par Moria Module - RAK
\par Miscellaneous - RAK & JWT
\par V2.0
\par Town Level & Misc - RAK
\par V3.0
\par Internal Help & Misc - RAK
\par V4.0
\par Source Release Version - RAK
\par 
\par Robert Alan Koeneke
\par Student/University of Oklahoma
\par 
\par Jimmey Wayne Todd Jr.
\par Student/University of Oklahoma
\par 
\par Umoria Version 5.2 (formerly UNIX Moria)
\par Version 4.83: 5/14/87
\par Version 4.85: 10/26/87
\par Version 4.87: 5/27/88
\par Version 5.0: 11/2/89
\par Version 5.2: 5/9/90
\par 
\par James E. Wilson, U.C. Berkeley
\par wilson@ernie.Berkeley.EDU
\par ...!ucbvax!ucbernie!wilson
\par 
\par Other contributors:
\par D. G. Kneller - MSDOS Moria port
\par Christopher J. Stuart - recall, options, inventory, and running code
\par Curtis McCauley - Macintosh Moria port
\par Stephen A. Jacobs - Atari ST Moria port
\par William Setzer - object naming code
\par David J. Grabiner - numerous bug reports, and consistency checking
\par Dan Bernstein - UNIX hangup signal fix, many bug fixes
\par and many others...
\par 
\par Copyright (c) 1989 James E. Wilson, Robert A. Keoneke
\par This software may be copied and distributed for educational, research, and not for profit purposes provided that this copyright and statement are included in all such copies.
\par 
\par Umoria Version 5.2, patch level 1
\par 
\par Angband Version 2.0 Alex Cutler, Andy Astrand, Sean Marsh, Geoff Hill,  Charles Teague.
\par 
\par Angband Version 2.4: 05/09/1993
\par 
\par Angband Version 2.5: 12/05/1993 Charles Swiger
\par 
\par Angband Version 2.6: 09/04/1994 Charles Swiger
\par 
\par Angband Version 2.7: 01/01/1995 Ben Harrison
\par 
\par Angband Version 2.8: 01/01/1997 Ben Harrison
\par 
\par Angband Version 2.9: 10th April 2000 Robert Ruehlmann
\par 
\par Copyright (c) 1997 Ben Harrison, James E. Wilson, Robert A. Koeneke
\par 
\par This software may be copied and distributed for educational, research, and not for profit purposes provided that this copyright and statement are included in all such copies.  Other copyrights may also apply.
\par 
\par All changes made by Ben Harrison and Robert Ruehlmann are also available under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE.  Note that this doesn't influence the current distribution, since parts of the source are still only available under the old Moria/Angband license.  Until all parts of Angband are distributed under the GPL the only valid license remains the original Moria/Angband license.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote h5_version}${\footnote Contributors (Incomplete)}+{\footnote h0_version:6}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Contributors (Incomplete)\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Peter Berger, "Prfnoff", Arcum Dagsson, Ed Cogburn, Matthias Kurzke, Ben Harrison, Steven Fuerst, Julian Lighton, Andrew Hill, Werner Baer, Tom Morton, "Cyric the Mad", Chris Kern, Tim Baker, Jurriaan Kalkman, Alexander Wilkins, Mauro Scarpa, John I'anson-Holton, "facade", Dennis van Es, Kenneth A. Strom, Wei-Hwa Huang, Nikodemus, Timo Pietil\'e4, Greg Wooledge, Keldon Jones, Shayne Steele, Dr. Andrew White, Musus Umbra, Jonathan Ellis
\par 
\par This Windows helpfile was converted from the Angband 3.0.4 internal online help by Jordan Hobbs and Robert Ruehlmann.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote b1_birth}${\footnote Character Characteristics}+{\footnote b0_birth:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Character Characteristics\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Each character has three primary attributes, sex, race, and class, that are chosen before the character is generated, and which will stay fixed for the entire life of that character.  These attributes have many effects, which will be mentioned as they come up.
\par 
\par Each character has a few secondary attributes, height, weight, social class, and background history, which are randomly determined, but which are affected by the sex and race of the character.  In general, these attributes are only used to provide "flavor" to the character, to assist in the role playing, but they do have a few minor effects on the game.  For example, background history affects social class, which affects the starting money. (Not a lot, in the case of some races: for instance, Half-Trolls are always going to be the scum of society, even if their father was the Clan Chief.) 
\par 
\par Each character also has six primary "stats", strength, intelligence, wisdom, dexterity, constitution, and charisma, which modify the abilities of the character in a variety of ways.  Every stat has a numerical value, ranging from a minimum of 3, up to a normal maximum of 18, and even higher, into the "percentile" range, represented as "18/01" through "18/100": this is the maximum that can be achieved intrinsically, for any given stat. If the character is started with the option of "maximize effect of race/class bonuses" (from the Birth Options menu, and this is set as "on" by default), the maximum figure of 18/100 is further adjusted by the adjustments for race and class - for instance, a Half-Troll Warrior will max out at 18/190 strength, but only 18/40 intelligence, whereas a Hobbit Mage will be able to reach 18/150 intelligence but only 18/30 strength. Equipment may add bonuses or penalties to this, and raise the player's stats beyond the normal intrinsic limits: the stats may go as high as they like, with the right choice of equipment, but the effects of having higher stats largely stop at 18/200.
\par 
\par Each character also has several primary "skills", disarming, magic devices, saving throws, stealth, searching ability, searching frequency, fighting skill, and shooting skill, which are derived from the character's race, class, level, stats, and current equipment.  These skills have rather obvious effects, but will be described more completely below.
\par 
\par Each character may have one or more "racially intrinsic skills", based on the race of the character.  These may include special resistances, or even abilities such as infravision.
\par 
\par Each character has experience, which increases as the character becomes more experienced, and a level, which is based on experience, and also on race and class.  As the experience rises, so does the level, and as the level rises, certain other abilities and characteristics rise as well.  Deep down inside, the real objective of the game is to increase your experience, and certain other characteristics, and also to collect useful items, to give you a decent chance against Morgoth.  Certain monsters can "drain" your experience, and thus your level, which will cause you to lose all of the effects of the higher level.  Luckily, you can restore drained experience through magical means, or by simply regaining the experience all over again.
\par 
\par Each character has some gold, which can be used to buy items from the shops in the town, and which can be obtained not only from selling items to the shops, but also by taking it from dead monsters and by finding it hidden in the dungeon.  Each character starts out with some gold, the amount of which is based on the characters social class (higher is better), charisma (higher is better), and other stats (less powerful characters start with more gold).  Each character also starts out with a few useful items, which may be kept, or sold to a shop-keeper for more gold. However, especially valuable items will never sell for the full price, as each shopkeeper has a maximum that he is prepared to pay for any item. The more generous shopkeepers may buy your items for up to 30,000 gold pieces: but some are really stingy, and will pay no more than 5,000.
\par 
\par Each character has an armor class, representing how well the character can avoid damage.  The armor class is affected by dexterity and the equipment.  Armor class on equipment is always denoted in [square brackets], usually as a figure of [X,+Y] where X is the intrinsic AC of the armor in question, and Y is the magical bonus to armor class provided by that item.
\par 
\par Each character has hit points, representing how much damage the character can sustain before he dies.  How many hit points a character has is determined by race, class, level and constitution, as follows:  each race has a basic "hit dice" number - for instance, a Dwarf's basic hit die is 11, while a hobbit's is 7. This is modified by class: for instance, a warrior gets a +9 bonus to the hit die, while a mage gets no bonus and a priest +2, so a dwarven warrior's total hit die will be (11+9)=20 - meaning that he gets between 1 and 20 hit points per level. If he were a priest, his hit dice would be (11+2)=13, and get between 1 and 13 hit points per level. The hobbit mage would get only 1-7 hps per level. (All characters get the maximum at first level: thereafter it is a random roll of 1dX where X is the hit die number, when the character goes up in level.) This is further modified by constitution - a character with high constitution will get a flat bonus of a certain number of hit points per level (recalculated right back to level 1: if you gain an extra hit point per level, and you are 42nd level, you will suddenly be 42 hit points better off.)
\par 
\par Each character has spell points, or mana, which represents how many spells (or prayers) a character can cast (or pray).  The maximum number of spell points is derived from your class, level, and intelligence (for spells) or wisdom (for prayers), and you can never have more spell points than the maximum.  Spell points may be regained by resting, or by magical means.  Warriors never have any spell points.  If a character gains enough wisdom or intelligence to get more spell points, the result is calculated right back to first level, just as with constitution and hit points.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote b2_birth}${\footnote Races}+{\footnote b0_birth:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Races\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 There are eleven different races that you can choose from in Angband.  Some races are restricted as to what profession they may be, and each race has its own adjustments to a character's stats and abilities. Most races also have intrinsic abilities.
\par 
\par \ul Human\ulnone 
\par The human is the base character.  All other races are compared to them.  Humans can choose any class and are average at everything.  Humans tend to go up levels faster than any other race because of their shorter life spans.  No racial adjustments or intrinsics occur to characters choosing human.
\par 
\par \ul Half-Elf\ulnone 
\par Half-elves tend to be smarter and faster than a human,  but not as wise or strong.  Half-elves are slightly better at magic, disarming, saving throws, stealth, bows and searching, but they are not as good at hand weapons.  Half-elves may choose any class and have their dexterity sustained.
\par 
\par \ul Elf\ulnone 
\par Elves are better magicians then humans, but not as good at fighting.  They tend to be smarter and faster than either humans or half-elves, but their wisdom and strength are low.  Elves are better at searching, disarming, perception, stealth, bows and magic, but they are not as good at hand weapons.  Elves are creatures more of magic than religion, and may thus not be priests or paladins: and they are resistant to attacks involving bright light, and have their dexterity sustained.
\par 
\par \ul Hobbit\ulnone 
\par Hobbits, or Halflings, are very good at bows, throwing,  and have good saving throws.  They also are very good at searching, disarming, perception, and stealth; so they make excellent rogues, but prefer to be called burglars.  They will be much weaker than humans, and not good at melee fighting.  Halflings have fair infravision, so they can detect warm creatures at a distance.  Hobbits may be warriors, rogues or rangers.  They have a strong hold on their life force, and are thus intrinsically resistant to life draining.
\par 
\par \ul Gnome\ulnone 
\par Gnomes are smaller than dwarves but larger than halflings.  They, like  the halflings, live in the earth in burrow-like homes.  Gnomes make excellent mages, and have very good saving throws.  They are good at searching, disarming, perception, and stealth.  They have lower strength than humans so they are not very good at fighting with hand weapons.  Gnomes have fair infravision, so they can detect warm-blooded creatures at a distance.  A gnome may choose between being a warrior, mage, priest, or rogue.  Gnomes are intrinsically protected against paralysis and some slowing effects.
\par 
\par \ul Dwarf\ulnone 
\par Dwarves are the headstrong miners and fighters of legend.  Since dungeons are the natural home of a dwarf, they are excellent choices for a warrior or priest - or indeed, that combination of the two, the paladin.  Dwarves tend to be stronger and tougher but slower and less intelligent than humans.  Because they are so headstrong and are somewhat wise, they resist spells which are cast on them.  Dwarves also have very good infravision because they live underground.  They do have one big drawback, though.  Dwarves are loudmouthed and proud, singing in loud voices, arguing with themselves for no good reason, screaming out challenges at imagined foes.  In other words, dwarves have a miserable stealth.  They can never be blinded. 
\par 
\par \ul Half-Orc\ulnone 
\par Half-Orcs make excellent warriors and decent priests, but are terrible at magic.  They are as bad as dwarves at stealth, and horrible at searching, disarming, and perception.  Half-Orcs are, let's face it, ugly.  They tend to pay more for goods in town.  Half-Orcs do make good warriors and rogues, for the simple reason that Half-Orcs tend to have great constitutions and lots of hit points.  Because of their preference to living underground to on the surface, half-orcs resist darkness attacks.
\par 
\par \ul Half-Troll\ulnone 
\par Half-Trolls are incredibly strong, and have more hit points than any other character race.  They are also very stupid and slow.  They will make great warriors and iffy priests.  They are bad at searching, disarming, perception, and stealth.  They are so ugly that a Half-Orc grimaces in their presence.  They also happen to be fun to run...  Half-trolls always have their strength sustained, and they regenerate like other trolls.  Unfortunately, this regeneration also requires them to eat more food than other races.
\par 
\par \ul Dunadan\ulnone 
\par Dunedain are a race of hardy men from the West.  This elder race surpasses human abilities in every field, especially constitution.  However, being men of the world, very little is new to them, and levels are very hard to gain...  They can play all classes except the rogue, as Dunedain are too noble to stoop to petty crime (when a Dunadan goes evil, he does it in a much bigger way.)  Their constitution cannot be reduced.
\par 
\par \ul High-Elf\ulnone 
\par High-Elves are descended from those among the Elves who heard and answered the call from the Valar at the very beginning of time, before the sun and moon were made, and lived in the Blessed Realm for many thousands of years before returning to mortal lands. Because of this, they are far superior in terms of abilities when compared to their lesser Elven kindred, and are able to be priests as well as all the other classes that normal Elves can be. They can also see into the invisible world of ghosts and wraiths. However, they find new experience even harder to come by than Dunedain: and their wisdom is still a little suspect. And like normal Elves, they resist attacks involving bright light.  High-Elves cannot be rogues (for the same reasons as Dunedain cannot be rogues) or paladins, but may be all other classes.
\par 
\par \ul Kobold\ulnone 
\par Kobolds are a race of small dog-headed humanoids that dwell underground.  They can see in the dark better than almost any other race, and are intrinsically resistant to poisons of all kinds.  They have a good dexterity and constitution.  However, they are weaker than humans, and also not noted for great intelligence.  Furthermore, they are ugly, and not trusted in town.  And while their constitution makes them tough, it still cannot prevent the fact that they are not the biggest of creatures, and have few hit points.  They can be warriors, rangers, rogues or priests.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote b3_birth}${\footnote Classes}+{\footnote b0_birth:4}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Classes\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Once a race has been chosen, you will need to pick a class.  Some classes will not be available to certain races, for instance, a Half-Troll cannot become a Paladin.
\par 
\par \ul Warrior\ulnone 
\par A warrior is a hack-and-slash character, who solves most of his problems by cutting them to pieces, but will occasionally fall back on the help of a magical device.  His prime stats are Strength and Constitution, and a good Dexterity can really help at times.  A Warrior will be good at Fighting and Throwing/Bows, but bad at most other skills.
\par 
\par \ul Mage\ulnone 
\par A mage must live by his wits.  He cannot hope to simply hack his way through the dungeon, and so must therefore use his magic to defeat, deceive, confuse, and escape.  A mage is not really complete without an assortment of magical devices to use in addition to his spells.  He can master the higher level magical devices far easier than anyone else, and has the best saving throw to resist effects of spells cast at him.  Intelligence and  Dexterity are his primary stats.  There is no rule that says a mage cannot become a good fighter, but spells are his true realm.
\par 
\par \ul Priest\ulnone 
\par A priest is a character of holy devotion.  They explore the dungeon only to destroy the evil that lurks within, and if treasure just happens to fall into their packs, well, so much more to the glory of their church!  Priests receive their spells from a deity, and therefore do not choose which spells they will learn.  They are familiar with magical devices, preferring to call them "instruments of God", but are not as good as a mage in their use.  Priests have good saving throws, and make decent fighters, but they are not as good at using sharp weapons (swords and polearms) owing to the Church's strictures about shedding blood:  so they are better off using blunt weapons such as maces.  Wisdom and Charisma are the priest's primary stats.
\par 
\par \ul Rogue\ulnone 
\par A rogue is a character that prefers to live by his cunning, but is capable of fighting his way out of a tight spot.  He is the master of traps and locks, no device being impossible for him to overcome.  A rogue has a high stealth allowing him to sneak around many creatures without having to fight, or sneak up and get the first blow.  A rogue's perception is higher than any other class, and many times he will notice a trap or secret door before having to search.  A rogue is better than warriors or paladins with magical devices, but still cannot rely on their performance.  Rogues can also learn a few spells, but not the powerful offensive spells mages can use.  A rogue's primary stats are Dexterity and Intelligence.
\par 
\par \ul Ranger\ulnone 
\par A ranger is a warrior/mage.  He is a good fighter, and the best of all the classes with a missile weapon such as a bow.  The ranger learns spells much more slowly than a  mage, but is capable of learning all but the most powerful spells.  Because a ranger is really a dual class character, more experience is required for him to advance.  A ranger has a good stealth, good perception, good searching, a good saving throw,  and is good with magical devices.  His primary stats are Strength, Intelligence and Dexterity.
\par 
\par \ul Paladin\ulnone 
\par A paladin is a warrior/priest.  He is a very good fighter, second only to the warrior class, but not very good at missile weapons.  He receives prayers at a slower pace then the priest, but can use all but the most powerful prayers.  Because a paladin is really a dual class character, it requires more experience to advance him.  A paladin lacks much in the way of abilities. He is poor at stealth, perception, searching, and  magical devices.  He has a decent saving throw due to his divine alliance.  His primary stats are Strength and Charisma, although Wisdom is necessary for his spells.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote b4_birth}${\footnote Stats}+{\footnote b0_birth:5}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Stats\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Strength\ulnone 
\par Strength is important in fighting with weapons and in melee combat.  A high strength can improve your chances of hitting as well as the amount of damage done with each hit.  Characters with low strengths may receive penalties.  Strength is also useful in tunnelling and in carrying heavy items.
\par 
\par \ul Intelligence\ulnone 
\par Intelligence affects the spellcasting abilities of mage-like spellcasters, mages, rangers, and rogues.  Intelligence will affect the number of spells you may learn each level as well as the number of spell points you receive.  A high intelligence may also improve your chances of successfully casting a spell.  You cannot learn spells if your intelligence is 7 or lower.  A good intelligence can also help with using magic devices, picking locks, and disarming traps.
\par 
\par \ul Wisdom\ulnone 
\par The primary function of wisdom is to determine the ability of a priest or paladin to use prayers, just like intelligence affects spellcasting.  Again, high wisdom will increase the number of spell points you have and increase the number of prayers you can learn each level, while improving the chance that a prayer will be successful.  A good wisdom can also help to improve your chances of resisting magical spells cast upon you by monsters.
\par 
\par \ul Dexterity\ulnone 
\par Dexterity is a combination of agility and quickness.  A high dexterity may allow a character to get multiple blows with lighter weapons, thus greatly increasing his kill power, and will increase his chances of hitting with any weapon and dodging blows from enemies.  Dexterity is also useful in picking locks, disarming traps, and protecting yourself from some of the thieves that inhabit the dungeons. Indeed, if the character has a high enough dexterity, thieves will never be successful in stealing from the player.
\par 
\par \ul Constitution\ulnone 
\par Constitution is a character's ability to resist damage to his body, and to recover from damage received.  Therefore a character with a high constitution will receive more hit points and also recover them faster while resting.
\par 
\par \ul Charisma\ulnone 
\par Charisma represents a character's personality and physical appearance.  A character with a high charisma will receive better prices from store owners, whereas a character with a very low charisma may be robbed blind. 
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote b5_birth}${\footnote Abilities}+{\footnote b0_birth:6}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Abilities\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Characters possess some different abilities which can help them to survive.  The starting abilities of a character are based upon race and class.  Abilities may be adjusted by high or low stats, and may increase with the level of the character.
\par 
\par \ul Infravision\ulnone 
\par Infravision is the ability to see heat sources.  Since most of the dungeon is cool or cold, infravision will not allow the player to see walls and objects.  Infravision will allow a character to see any warm-blooded creatures up to a certain distance.  This ability works equally well with or without a light source.  However, many of Angband's creatures are cold-blooded, and will not be detected unless lit up by a light source.  All nonhuman races have innate infravision ability.  Humans (including Dunedain) cannot gain infravision unless it is magically enhanced.  Infravision does not increase with character level, and is purely dependent on race and magical equipment.
\par 
\par \ul Fighting\ulnone 
\par Fighting is the ability to hit and do damage with weapons or fists.  Normally a character gets a single blow from any weapon, but if his dexterity and strength are high enough, he may receive more blows per round with lighter weapons.  Strength and dexterity both modify the ability to hit an opponent.  This skill increases with the level of the character.
\par 
\par \ul Shooting Ability\ulnone 
\par Using ranged missile weapons (and throwing objects) is included in this skill.  Different stats apply to different weapons, but this ability may modify the distance an object is thrown/fired, the amount of damage done, and the ability to hit a creature.  This skill increases with the level of the character.
\par 
\par \ul Saving Throws\ulnone 
\par A Saving Throw is the ability of a character to resist the effects of a spell cast on him by another person/creature.  This does not include spells cast on the player by his own stupidity, such as quaffing a nasty potion.  This ability increases with the level of the character, but then most high level creatures are better at casting spells, so it tends to even out.  A high wisdom also increases this ability.
\par 
\par \ul Stealth\ulnone 
\par The ability to move silently about is very useful.  Characters with good stealth can usually surprise their opponents, gaining the first blow.  Also, creatures may fail to notice a stealthy character entirely, allowing a player to avoid certain fights.  This skill is based entirely upon race and class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.
\par 
\par \ul Disarming\ulnone 
\par Disarming is the ability to remove traps safely, and also includes picking locks on traps and doors.  A successful disarming will gain the character some experience.  A trap must be found before it can be disarmed.  Dexterity and intelligence both modify the ability to disarm, and this ability increases with the level of the character.
\par 
\par \ul Magical Devices\ulnone 
\par Using a magical device such as a wand or staff requires experience and knowledge.  Spell users such as mages and priests are therefore much better at using a magical device than say a warrior.  This skill is modified by intelligence, and increases with the level of the character.
\par 
\par \ul Searching Frequency (Perception)\ulnone 
\par Perception is the ability to notice something without actively seeking it out.  This skill is based entirely upon race and class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.
\par 
\par \ul Searching Ability (Searching)\ulnone 
\par To search is to actively look for secret doors, floor traps, and traps on chests.  Rogues are the best at searching, but mages, rangers, and priests are also good at it.  This skill is based entirely upon race and class, and will never improve unless magically enhanced.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote b6_birth}${\footnote Combination, Stat Bonus, and Ability Tables}+{\footnote b0_birth:7}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Combination, Stat Bonus, and Ability Tables\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\b\fs20 Combinations of Race and Class (not enforced)\b0 
\par 
\par \b\f1\fs16              Warrior   Mage    Priest    Rogue   Ranger   Paladin\b0 
\par Human         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
\par Half-Elf      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
\par Elf           Yes      Yes      No       Yes      Yes      No
\par Hobbit        Yes      No       No       Yes      Yes      No
\par Gnome         Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes      No       No
\par Dwarf         Yes      No       Yes      No       No       Yes
\par Half-Orc      Yes      No       Yes      Yes      No       No
\par Half-Troll    Yes      No       Yes      No       No       No
\par Dunadan       Yes      Yes      Yes      No       Yes      Yes
\par High-Elf      Yes      Yes      Yes      No       Yes      No\f0 
\par \fs20 
\par 
\par \b Stat Bonus Tables\b0 
\par 
\par Stat, hit dice, infravision and experience points per level modifications due to race are listed in the following table.  To get the total hit dice and XP modifier, add the "race" and "class" numbers: for instance, a Dwarf Priest has a hit die of 11+2=13 (i.e. he will get 1d13 hit points per level, adjusted for constitution) and an XP modifier of 20+20=40%.
\par 
\par \f1\fs16             \b STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  HD (base)   XP/level  Infra\b0 
\par Human        0    0    0    0    0    0      10          +0%    None
\par Half-Elf    -1   +1    0   +1   -1   +1       9         +10%   20 feet
\par Elf         -1   +2   +1   +1   -2   +1       8         +20%   30 feet
\par Hobbit      -2   +2   +1   +3   +2   +1       7         +10%   40 feet
\par Gnome       -1   +2    0   +2   +1   -2       8         +25%   40 feet
\par Dwarf       +2   -3   +2   -2   +2   -3      11         +20%   50 feet
\par Half-Orc    +2   -1    0    0   +1   -4      10         +10%   30 feet
\par Half-Troll  +4   -4   -2   -4   +3   -6      12         +20%   30 feet
\par Dunadan     +1   +2   +2   +2   +3   +2      10         +80%    None
\par High-Elf    +1   +3   -1   +3   +1   +5      10        +100%   40 feet
\par Kobold      -1   -1    0   +2   +2   -2       8         +15%   50 feet
\par 
\par             \b STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  HD (bonus)  XP/level\b0 
\par Warrior     +5   -2   -2   +2   +2   -1       9          +0%
\par Mage        -5   +3    0   +1   -2   +1       0         +30%
\par Priest      -1   -3   +3   -1    0   +2       2         +20%
\par Rogue       +2   +1   -2   +3   +1   -1       6         +25%
\par Ranger      +2   +2    0   +1   +1   +1       4         +30%
\par Paladin     +3   -3   +1    0   +2   +2       6         +35%\f0 
\par \fs20 
\par 
\par \b Ability Tables\b0 
\par 
\par \f1\fs16            \b Disarm  Device   Save  Stealth  Search  Percep   Fight   Bows\b0  
\par Human         0       0       0       0       0      10       0       0
\par Half-Elf      2       3       3       1       6      11      -1       5
\par Elf           5       6       6       1       8      12      -5      15
\par Hobbit       15      18      18       4      12      15     -10      20
\par Gnome        10      12      12       3       6      13      -8      12
\par Dwarf         2       9       9      -1       7      10      15       0
\par Half-Orc     -3      -3      -3      -1       0       7      12      -5
\par Half-Troll   -5      -8      -8      -2      -1       5      20     -10
\par Dunadan       4       5       5       2       3      13      15      10
\par High-Elf      4      20      20       3       3      14      10      25
\par Kobold       10       5       0       4      15      15      -5      10
\par 
\par            \b Disarm  Device   Save  Stealth  Search  Percep   Fight   Bows\b0  
\par Warrior    25(+10) 18(+7)  18(+10)  1(+0)  14(+0)   7(+0)  70(+45) 55(+45)
\par Mage       30(+7)  36(+13) 30(+9)   2(+0)  16(+0)  20(+0)  34(+15) 20(+15)
\par Priest     25(+7)  30(+10) 32(+12)  2(+0)  16(+0)   8(+0)  48(+20) 35(+20)
\par Rogue      45(+15) 32(+10) 28(+10)  5(+0)  32(+0)  24(+0)  60(+40) 66(+30)
\par Ranger     30(+8)  32(+10) 28(+10)  3(+0)  24(+0)  16(+0)  56(+30) 72(+45)
\par Paladin    20(+7)  25(+10) 25(+11)  1(+0)  12(+0)   2(+0)  68(+35) 40(+30)\f0 
\par \fs20 
\par For character classes, there are two figures: the first figure is the base level of the ability, while the second figure (in parentheses) is the bonus that the character gains to this skill every ten levels. So, to find out the total skill value of any character's skills, add the "race" value to the "class" value, and then the bonus once for every ten levels that the character
\par has.  
\par 
\par (Please note, however, that these numbers are only good for comparing characters to each other in the absence of other bonuses from high stats (strength bonus to-dam, dex bonus to-hit, wisdom bonus to saving throw, intelligence bonus to magical device usage, etc.) or wearing magical items.)
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote c1_dungeon}${\footnote Symbols on Your Map}+{\footnote c0_dungeon:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Symbols on Your Map\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Symbols on your map can be broken down into three categories: Features of the dungeon such as walls, floor, doors, and traps; Objects which can be picked up such as treasure, weapons, magical devices, etc; and creatures which may or may not move about the dungeon, but are mostly harmful to your character's well being.
\par 
\par Some symbols are used to represent more than one type of entity, and some symbols are used to represent entities in more than one category.  The "\f1 @\f0 " symbol (by default) is used to represent the character.
\par 
\par It will not be necessary to remember all of the symbols and their meanings.  The "slash" command ("/") will identify any character appearing on your map.
\par 
\par Note that you can use a "user pref file" to change any of these symbols to something you are more comfortable with.
\par 
\par \ul Features that do not block line of sight\ulnone 
\par \f1 .   A floor space                 1   Entrance to General Store
\par .   A trap (hidden)               2   Entrance to Armoury
\par ^   A trap (known)                3   Entrance to Weapon Smith
\par ;   A glyph of warding            4   Entrance to Temple
\par '   An open door                  5   Entrance to Alchemy Shop
\par '   A broken door                 6   Entrance to Magic Shop
\par <   A staircase up                7   Entrance to the Black Market
\par >   A staircase down              8   Entrance to your Home\f0 
\par 
\par \ul Features that block line of sight\ulnone 
\par \f1 #   A secret door                 #   A wall
\par +   A closed door                 %   A mineral vein
\par +   A locked door                 *   A mineral vein with treasure
\par +   A jammed door                 :   A pile of rubble\f0 
\par 
\par \ul Objects\ulnone 
\par \f1 !   A potion (or flask)           /   A pole-arm
\par ?   A scroll (or book)            |   An edged weapon
\par ,   A mushroom (or food)          \\   A hafted weapon
\par -   A wand or rod                 \}   A sling, bow, or x-bow
\par _   A staff                       \{   A shot, arrow, or bolt
\par =   A ring                        (   Soft armour
\par "   An amulet                     [   Hard armour
\par $   Gold or gems                  ]   Misc. armour
\par ~   Lites, Tools, Chests, etc     )   A shield
\par ~   Junk, Sticks, Skeletons, etc  &   (unused)\f0 
\par 
\par \ul Monsters\ulnone 
\par \f1 $   Creeping Coins      ,   Mushroom Patch
\par a   Giant Ant           A   Angelic being
\par b   Giant Bat           B   Bird
\par c   Giant Centipede     C   Canine (Dog)
\par d   Dragon              D   Ancient Dragon
\par e   Floating Eye        E   Elemental
\par f   Feline (Cat)        F   Dragon Fly
\par g   Golem               G   Ghost
\par h   Humanoids           H   Hybrid
\par i   Icky-Thing          I   Insect
\par j   Jelly               J   Snake
\par k   Kobold              K   Killer Beetle
\par l   Giant Louse         L   Lich
\par m   Mold                M   Multi-Headed Hydra
\par n   Naga                N   (unused)
\par o   Orc                 O   Ogre
\par p   Human "person"      P   Giant "person"
\par q   Quadruped           Q   Quylthulg (Pulsing Flesh Mound)
\par r   Rodent              R   Reptile/Amphibian
\par s   Skeleton            S   Spider/Scorpion/Tick
\par t   Townsperson         T   Troll
\par u   Minor Demon         U   Major Demon
\par v   Vortex              V   Vampire
\par w   Worm or Worm Mass   W   Wight/Wraith
\par x   (unused)            X   Xorn/Xaren
\par y   Yeek                Y   Yeti
\par z   Zombie/Mummy        Z   Zephyr Hound\f0 
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote c2_dungeon}${\footnote The Town Level}+{\footnote c0_dungeon:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b The Town Level\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 The town level is where you will begin your adventure.  The town consists of eight buildings (each with an entrance), some townspeople, and a wall which surrounds the town.  The first time you are in town it will be daytime, but note that the sun rises and falls (rather instantly) as time passes.
\par 
\par \b Townspeople\b0 
\par 
\par The town contains many different kinds of people.  There are the street urchins, young children who will mob an adventurer for money, and seem to come out of the woodwork when excited.  Blubbering idiots are a constant annoyance, but not harmful.  Public drunks wander about the town singing, and are of no threat to anyone.  Sneaky rogues hang about watching for a likely victim to mug.  And finally, no town would be complete without a swarm of half drunk warriors, who take offense or become annoyed just for the fun of it. (There are assumed to be other people in the town, but they are not represented on the screen as they do not interact with the player in any way.)
\par 
\par Most of the townspeople should be avoided by the largest possible distance when you wander from store to store.  Fights will break out, though, so be prepared.  Since your character grew up in this world of intrigue, no experience is awarded for killing the town inhabitants, though you may acquire treasure.
\par 
\par \b Town Buildings
\par \b0 
\par Your character will begin his adventure with some basic supplies, and some extra gold with which to purchase more supplies at the town stores.
\par 
\par You may enter any open store and haggle with the owner to buy or sell items of the appropriate type. The price that the shopkeeper requests is dependent on the price of the item, the player's charisma, the shopkeeper's "greed" factor (the Black Market shopkeepers are always *VERY* greedy), and the races of the player and shopkeeper.
\par 
\par Once inside a store, you will see the name and race of the store owner, the name of the store, the maximum amount of cash that the store owner will pay for any one item, and the store inventory, listed along with the prices.
\par 
\par You will also see an (incomplete) list of available commands.  Note that many of the commands which work in the dungeon work in the stores as well, but some do not, especially those which involve "using" objects.
\par 
\par Stores do not always have everything in stock.  As the game progresses, they may get new items so check from time to time.  Also, if you sell them an item, it may get sold to a customer while you are adventuring, so don't always expect to be able to get back everything you have sold.  Note that the inventory of a store will not change while you are in town, even if you save the game and return.  You must spend time in the dungeon if you wish the store owner to clear out his stock and acquire new items.  If you have a lot of spare gold, you can purchase every item in a store, which will induce the store owner to bring out new stock, and perhaps even retire.
\par 
\par Store owners will not buy known harmful or useless items.  If an object is unidentified, they will pay you some base price for it.  Once they have bought it they will immediately identify the object.  If it is a good object, they will add it to their inventory.  If it was a bad bargain, they simply throw the item away.  In any case, you may receive some knowledge of the item if another is encountered.
\par 
\par \ul The General Store ("1")\ulnone 
\par The General Store sells foods, drinks, some clothing, torches, lamps, oil, shovels, picks, and spikes.  All of these items and some others can be sold back to the General store for money.
\par 
\par \ul The Armoury ("2")\ulnone 
\par The Armoury is where the town's armour is fashioned.  All sorts of protective gear may be bought and sold here, though the owner will not stock anything better than bar chain mail unless it is sold to him by the player.
\par 
\par \ul The Weaponsmith ("3")\ulnone 
\par The Weaponsmith's shop is where the town's weapons are fashioned.  Hand and missile weapons may be purchased and sold here, along with arrows, bolts, and shots. As with the armoury, not all weapon types will be stocked here, unless they are sold to the shop by the player first.
\par 
\par \ul The Temple ("4")\ulnone 
\par The Temple deals in healing and restoration potions, as well as bless scrolls, word of recall scrolls, some approved priestly weapons, as well as prayer books.
\par 
\par \ul The Alchemist ("5")\ulnone 
\par The Alchemist's shop deals in all types of potions and scrolls.
\par 
\par \ul The Magic User's Shop ("6")\ulnone 
\par The Magic User's Shop deals in all sorts of rings, wands, amulets, and staves, as well as magic user books.
\par 
\par \ul The Black Market ("7")\ulnone 
\par The Black Market will sell and buy anything at extortionate prices.  However it occasionally has VERY good items in it.  The shopkeepers are not known for their tolerance...
\par 
\par \ul Your Home ("8")\ulnone 
\par This is your house where you can store objects that you cannot carry on your travels, or will need at a later date.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z24}${\footnote 24}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 24\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z25}${\footnote 25}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 25\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote c3_dungeon}${\footnote Within the Dungeon}+{\footnote c0_dungeon:4}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Within the Dungeon\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Once your character is adequately supplied with food, light, armor, and weapons, he is ready to enter the dungeon.  Move on top of the \f1 >\f0  symbol and use the "Down" command (">").
\par 
\par Your character will enter a maze of interconnecting staircases and finally arrive somewhere on the first level of the dungeon.  Each level of the dungeon is fifty feet high (thus dungeon level "Lev 1" is often called "50 ft"), and is divided into (large) rectangular regions (several times larger than the screen) by titanium walls.  Once you leave a level by a staircase, you will never again find your way back to that region of that level, but there are an infinite number of other regions at that same "depth" that you can explore later.  So be careful that you have found all the treasure before you leave a level, or you may never find it again!  The monsters, of course, can use the stairs, and you may eventually encounter them again.
\par 
\par In the dungeon, there are many things to find, but your character must survive many horrible and challenging encounters to find the treasure lying about and take it safely back to the town to sell.
\par 
\par There are two sources for light once inside the dungeon.  Permanent light which has been magically placed within rooms, and a light source carried by the player.  If neither is present, the character will be unable to see.  This will affect searching, picking locks, disarming traps, reading scrolls, casting spells, browsing books, etc.  So be very careful not to run out of light!
\par 
\par A character must wield a torch or lamp in order to supply his own light.  A torch or lamp burns fuel as it is used, and once it is out of fuel, it stops supplying light.  You will be warned as the light approaches this point.  You may use the "Fuel" command ("F") to refuel your lantern (with flasks of oil) or your torch (with other torches), so it is a good idea to carry extra torches or flasks of oil, as appropriate.  There are rumours of objects of exceptional power which glow with their own never-ending light.
\par 
\par \b Objects Found in the Dungeon
\par \b0 
\par The mines are full of objects just waiting to be picked up and used.  How did they get there?  Well, the main source for useful items are all the foolish adventurers that proceeded into the dungeon before you.  They get killed, and the helpful creatures scatter the various treasure throughout the dungeon.  Many cursed items present in the dungeon - either left behind as the result of a failed attempt to create a magic items, or deliberately placed by evil sorcerers who enjoy a good joke when it gets you killed...
\par 
\par Only one object may occupy a given floor location, which may or may not also contain one creature.  Doors, rubble, traps, and staircases are considered "objects" for this purpose.  As below, any item may actually be a pile of up to 99 identical items.  With the right choice of options, you may be able to stack several items in the same grid.
\par 
\par You pick up objects by moving on top of them.  You can carry up to 23 different items in your backpack while wearing and wielding up to 12 others.  Although you are limited to 23 different items, each item may actually be a stack of up to 99 similar items.  If you "t"ake off an item, it will go into your backpack if there is room: if there is no room in your backpack, it will drop onto the floor, so be careful when swapping one wielded weapon or worn piece of armor for another when your pack is full.
\par 
\par You are, however, limited in the total amount of weight that you can carry.  As you approach this value, you become slower, making it easier for monsters to chase you.  Note that there is no upper bound on how much you can carry, if you do not mind being slow.  Your weight limit is determined by your strength.
\par 
\par Many objects found within the dungeon have special commands for their use.  Wands must be Aimed, staves must be Used, scrolls must be Read, and potions must be Quaffed.  You may, in general, not only use items in your pack, but
\par also items on the ground, if you are standing on top of them.
\par 
\par Chests are complex objects, containing traps, locks, and possibly treasure or other objects inside them once they are opened.  Many of the commands that apply to traps or doors also apply to chests and, like traps and doors, these commands do not work if you are carrying the chest.
\par 
\par One item in particular will be discussed here.  The scroll of "Word of Recall" can be found within the dungeon, or bought at the temple in town.  It acts in two manners, depending upon your current location.  If read within the dungeon, it will teleport you back to town.  If read in town, it will teleport you back down to the deepest level of the dungeon which your
\par character has previously been on.  This makes the scroll very useful for getting back to the deeper levels of Angband.  Once the scroll has been read it takes a while for the spell to act, so don't expect it to save you in a crisis.  Reading a second scroll before the first has had a chance to take effect will cancel both scrolls.
\par 
\par You may "inscribe" any object with a textual inscription of your choice.  These inscriptions are not limited in length, though you may not be able to see the whole inscription on the item.  The game applies special meaning to inscriptions containing any text of the form "@#" or "@x#" or "!x" or "!*" (see {\uldb Command Descriptions}{\v !JumpID()}).
\par 
\par The game provides some "fake" inscriptions to help you keep track of your possessions.  Wands and staves which are known to be empty will be inscribed with "empty".  Objects which have been tried at least once but haven't been identified yet will be inscribed with "tried".  Cursed objects are inscribed with "cursed".  Broken objects may be inscribed with "broken".  Also, any item which was purchased at a discount, implying that it is slightly "sub-standard", will be inscribed with the appropriate "discount", such as "25% off".  Note that these inscriptions are fake, and cannot be removed.
\par 
\par Also, occasionally you will notice that something in your inventory or equipment list seems to be magical.  High level characters are much more likely to notice this than beginning characters.  When you do notice this, the item in question will be inscribed with "good" or "cursed" as is relevant. Warriors, paladins (both well acquainted with weapons and armor) and rogues (who have handled many powerful items in their time as stolen goods) are more sensitive, and can notice not just that an item is out of the ordinary, but just *how* extraordinary it is: they can notice an "excellent" item (ego item), a "worthless" one (cursed ego item), a "special" one (artifact) and a "terrible" one (cursed artifact). All classes will know an item is "special" if it cannot be destroyed with the "k" command (original keyset.)
\par 
\par It is rumored that rings of power and extra rare spell books may be found deeper in the dungeon...
\par 
\par And lastly, a final warning: not all objects are what they seem.  The line between tasty food and a poisonous mushroom is a fine one, and sometimes a chest full of treasure will grow teeth in its lid and bite your hand off...
\par 
\par \b Cursed Objects\b0 
\par 
\par Some objects, mainly armor and weapons, have had curses laid upon them.  These horrible objects will look like any other normal item, but will detract from your character's stats or abilities if worn.  They will also be impossible to remove until a remove curse is performed.  In fact some are so badly cursed that even this will not work, and more potent methods are needed.
\par 
\par If you wear or wield a cursed item, you will immediately feel deathly cold, and the item will be marked with the fake inscription "cursed".
\par 
\par Shopkeepers will refuse to buy any item which is known to be cursed, either by having been identified or by being marked with the fake inscription.
\par 
\par \b Mining\b0 
\par 
\par Much of the treasure within the dungeon can be found only by mining it out of the walls.  Many rich strikes exist within each level, but must be found and mined.  Quartz veins are the richest, yielding the most metals and gems, but magma veins will have some hoards hidden within.
\par 
\par Mining is rather difficult without a pick or shovel.  Picks and shovels have an additional magical ability expressed as `(+#)'.  The higher the number, the better the magical digging ability of the tool.  A pick or shovel also has plusses to hit and damage, and can be used as a weapon, because, in fact, it is one.
\par 
\par When a vein of quartz or magma is located, the character may wield his pick or shovel and begin digging out a section.  When that section is removed, he can locate another section of the vein and begin the process again.  Since granite rock is much harder to dig through, it is much faster to follow the vein exactly and dig around the granite.  Eventually, it becomes easier to simply kill monsters and discover items in the dungeon to sell, than to walk around digging for treasure.  But, early on, mineral veins can be a wonderful source of easy treasure.
\par 
\par If the character has a scroll, staff, or spell of treasure location, he can immediately locate all strikes of treasure within a vein shown on the screen.  This makes mining much easier and more profitable.
\par 
\par Note that a character with high strength and/or a heavy weapon does not need a shovel/pick to dig, but even the strongest character will benefit from a pick if trying to dig through a granite wall.
\par 
\par It is sometimes possible to get a character trapped within the dungeon by using various magical spells and items.  So it can be a good idea to always carry some kind of digging tool, even when you are not planning on tunneling for treasure.
\par 
\par There are rumors of certain incredibly profitable rooms buried deep in the dungeon and completely surrounded by titanium and granite walls, requiring a digging implement or magical means to enter.  The same rumors imply that these rooms are guarded by incredibly powerful monsters, so beware!
\par 
\par \b Staircases, Secret Doors, Passages, and Rooms\b0 
\par 
\par Staircases are the manner in which you get deeper or climb out of the dungeon.  The symbols for the up and down staircases are the same as the commands to use them.  A "\f1 <\f0 " represents an up staircase and a "\f1 >\f0 " represents a down staircase.  You must move your character over the staircase before you can use it.
\par 
\par Each level has at least one up staircase and at least two down staircases.  There are no exceptions to this rule.  You may have trouble finding some well hidden secret doors, or you may have to dig through obstructions to get to them, but you can always find the stairs if you look hard enough.  Stairs, like titanium walls, and shop entrances, cannot be destroyed by any means.
\par 
\par Many secret doors are used within the dungeon to confuse and demoralize adventurers foolish enough to enter.  But with some luck, and lots of concentration, you can find these secret doors.  Secret doors will sometimes hide rooms or corridors, or even entire sections of that level of the dungeon.  Sometimes they simply hide small empty closets or even dead ends.  Secret doors always look like granite walls, just like traps always look like normal floors.
\par 
\par Creatures in the dungeon will generally know and use these secret doors, and can often be counted on to leave them open behind them when they pass through.
\par 
\par For historical reasons, secret doors are never locked.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z27}${\footnote 27}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 27\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z28}${\footnote 28}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 28\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z29}${\footnote 29}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 29\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote c4_dungeon}${\footnote Winning the Game}+{\footnote c0_dungeon:5}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Winning the Game\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Once your character has killed Sauron, who lives on level 99 (4950') in the dungeon, a magical staircase will appear that will allow you to finally reach level 100.  Morgoth lurks on this level of his dungeon, and you will not be able to go below his level until you have killed him.  Try to avoid wandering around on level 100 unless you are ready for him, since he has a habit of coming at you across the dungeon, the Mighty Hammer 'Grond' in hand, to slay you for your impudence.
\par 
\par Morgoth cannot be killed by some of the easier methods used on normal creatures.  Morgoth, like all other "Unique" monsters, will simply teleport away to another region of the level if you attempt to use a spell such as destruction is upon him.  Morgoth, like some other monsters, cannot be polymorphed, slept, charmed, or banished.  Magical spells like Mana Storm and Orb of Draining are effective against him, as are some of the more powerful weapons, but he is difficult to kill and if allowed to escape for a time he will heal himself rapidly.
\par 
\par If you should actually survive the attempt of killing Morgoth, you will receive the status of WINNER.  You may continue to explore, and may even save the game and play more later, but since you have defeated the toughest creature alive, there is really not much point.  Unless you wish to listen to the rumors of a powerful ring buried somewhere in the dungeon, or a suit of dragon scale mail that resists everything...
\par 
\par When you are ready to retire, simply "commit suicide" (using the "Q" key) to have your character entered into the high score list as a winner.  Note that until you retire, you can still be killed, so you may want to retire before wandering into yet another horde of greater demons.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote c5_dungeon}${\footnote Upon Death and Dying}+{\footnote c0_dungeon:6}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Upon Death and Dying\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 If your character falls below 0 hit points, he has died and cannot be restored.  A tombstone showing information about your character will be displayed.  You are also permitted to get a record of your character, and all your equipment (identified) either on the screen or in a file.
\par 
\par Your character will leave behind a reduced save file, which contains only the monster memory and your option choices.  It may be restored, in which case a new character is generated exactly as if the file was not there, but the new player will find his monster memory containing all the experience of past incarnations.
\par 
\par There are a variety of ways to "cheat" death (including using a special "cheating option") when it would otherwise occur.  This will fully heal your character, returning him to the town, and marking him in various ways as a character which has cheated death.  Cheating death, like using any of the "cheating options", will prevent your character from appearing on the high score list.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote d1_attack}${\footnote Monster Memories}+{\footnote d0_attack:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Monster Memories\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 There are hundreds of different creatures in the pits of Angband, many of which have the same letter symbol and color on the screen.  The exact species of a creature can be discovered by looking at it.  It is also very difficult to keep track of the capabilities of various creatures.  Luckily, Angband automatically keeps track of your experiences with a particular creature.  This feature is called the monster memory.  You monster memory recalls the particular attacks of each creature (whether or not technically a monster) which you have suffered, as well as recalling if you have observed them to multiply or move erratically, or drop treasure, etc.  Otherwise you would simply have to take notes, which is an unnecessary bother.
\par 
\par If you have killed enough of a particular creature, or suffered enough attacks, recalling the monster memory may also provide you with information not otherwise available, such as a armor class or hit dice.  These are not explained, but may be useful to give the relative danger of each creature.  This memory can be passed on to a new character even after you die by means of a reduced save file. (You must start the new character by "opening the existing save file" of the dead character for this to happen: using the "start new character" option will not give access to any monster memory.)
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote d2_attack}${\footnote Your Weapon}+{\footnote d0_attack:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Your Weapon\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Carrying a weapon in your backpack does you no good.  You must wield a weapon before it can be used in a fight.  A secondary weapon can be kept by keeping it in the backpack, and switching it with the primary weapon when needed. This is most often used when switching between a melee weapon and a digging tool, or when carrying two weapons, each of which provides a rare power that the character needs at two separate times.
\par 
\par Weapons have two main magical characteristics, their enchanted ability to hit and their enchanted ability to do damage, expressed as `(+#,+#)'.  A normal weapon would be `(+0,+0)'.  Many weapons in Angband have bonuses to hit and/or do damage.  Some weapons are cursed, and have penalties that hurt the player.  Cursed weapons cannot be unwielded until the curse is lifted.  Identifying a weapon will inform you of the magical bonuses and penalties and whether or not it is cursed.
\par 
\par Angband assumes that your youth in the rough environment near the dungeons has taught you the relative merits of different weapons, and displays as part of their description the damage dice which define their capabilities.  Any damage enchantment is added to the dice roll for that weapon.  The dice used for a given  weapon is displayed as "XdY".  The number "X" indicates how many dice to roll, and number "Y" indicates how many sides they have. A "2d6" weapon will thus give damage from 2 to 12, plus any damage bonus. The weight of a weapon is also a consideration.  Heavy weapons may hit harder, but they are also harder to use.  Depending on your strength, dexterity, character class, and weapon weight, you may get several attacks per turn: high dexterity and strength and low weapon weight are the main factors.  Warriors may get up to a maximum of 6 attacks per turn: mages are limited to only 4: other classes may get up to 5.
\par 
\par Missile booster weapons such as bows have their characteristics added to those of the missile used, if the proper weapon/missile combination is used and the the launcher multiplier is applied to the total damage, making missile weapons very powerful given the proper missiles, especially if they are enchanted.
\par 
\par Although you receive any magical bonuses an unidentified weapon may possess when you wield it, those bonuses will not be added in to the displayed values of to-hit and to-dam on your character sheet.  You must identify the weapon before the displayed values reflect the real values used.
\par 
\par Some rare weapons have special abilities.  These are called ego weapons, and are feared by great and meek.  An ego weapon must be wielded to receive the benefit of its abilities. It should be noted that some of these items are considerably more powerful than others, and generally the most powerful items are the rarest. Also important is the fact that not all ego-items are nice...
\par 
\par Ego weapons are denoted by the following "names":
\par 
\par \ul Defender\ulnone 
\par A magical weapon that actually helps the wielder defend himself, thus increasing his/her armor class, and protecting him/her against damage from fire, cold, acid, lightning, and falls.  This weapon also will increase your stealth, let you see invisible creatures, protect you from paralyzation and some slowing attacks, and help you regenerate hit points and mana faster.  As a result of the regeneration ability, you will use up food somewhat faster than normal while wielding such a weapon.  These powerful weapons also will sustain one stat, though this stat will vary from weapon to weapon.
\par 
\par \ul Holy Avenger\ulnone 
\par A Holy Avenger is one of the more powerful of weapons.  A Holy Avenger will increase your wisdom and your armour class.  This weapon will do extra damage when used against evil, demonic and undead creatures, and will also give you the ability to see invisible creatures.  These weapons are basically extremely powerful versions of Blessed Blades and can be wielded by priests with no penalty. These weapons, like (Defender) weapons, also will sustain one random stat.
\par 
\par \ul Blessed\ulnone 
\par A blessed blade will increase your wisdom.  If you are a priest, wielding a non-blessed sword or polearm causes a small penalty while attacking and may infuriate your god, decreasing the chances that he will accept your prayers: a blessed blade may be wielded without this penalty.  Blessed blades also have one extra, random, power.
\par 
\par \ul Westernesse\ulnone 
\par A Weapon of Westernesse is one of the more powerful weapons.  It slays orcs, trolls, and giants, while increasing your strength, dexterity, and constitution.  It also lets you see invisible creatures and protects from paralyzation and some slowing attacks.  These blades were made by the Dunedain.
\par 
\par \ul Extra Attacks\ulnone 
\par A weapon of extra attacks will allow the wielder to deliver extra attacks during each round.
\par 
\par \ul Elemental Branded Weapons\ulnone 
\par Each of the four elemental attacks has a corresponding weapon which will do treble its base damage to creatures not resistant to that element. (It should be noted that the magical damage bonus is not affected by this: a weapon of Flame (2d6) (+5,+6) does 6d6+6 damage per hit, not 6d6+18, against creatures which are not fire-resistant.)  There are weapons of Flame, Frost, Lightning, Acid and Poison brands.
\par 
\par \ul Slaying\ulnone 
\par These weapons do extra damage against creatures of a vulnerable type.  Weapons of Slay Evil and Slay Animal do double the base damage, while weapons of Slay Orc, Troll, Giant, Dragon, Demon and Undead do triple the base damage. As with elemental branded weapons, the magical damage bonus is not affected.
\par 
\par \ul *Slaying*\ulnone 
\par These weapons, in addition to doing extra damage to your enemies, have extra powers as well. In each case, one stat is increased. Weapons of *Slaying* are also more powerful against their opponents, doing five times their base damage rather than the normal three.
\par 
\par \ul Morgul\ulnone 
\par These blades are so foully cursed with evil, it is rumored that it is nearly impossible to remove them without a special curse-removing spell, much stronger than normal Remove Curse. 
\par 
\par \ul Digging\ulnone 
\par These powerful diggers will dig through granite as if it were mere wood, and mineral veins as if they were butter. Permanent rock is still an impassable obstacle.
\par 
\par \ul Accuracy\ulnone 
\par These launchers have an unnaturally high to-hit number, making them extremely accurate.
\par 
\par \ul Velocity\ulnone 
\par These launchers do an unnaturally high amount of damage due to their high to-hit number.
\par 
\par \ul Extra Shots\ulnone 
\par These launchers allow the wielder to shoot more times per round than normal.
\par 
\par \ul Extra Might\ulnone 
\par These launchers have a higher base damage than normally made launchers of their type. For instance, a Long Bow of Extra Might (x3)(+X,+Y)(+2) is really a Long Bow (x5)(+X,+Y) where (+X,+Y) is the standard to-hit and to-dam. As the damage multiplier with the bow affects *everything* - the base arrow damage, the magical damage bonus on both the bow and the arrow, and any bonuses for slaying or elemental-branded arrows - this makes it a powerful weapon.
\par 
\par \ul Wounding\ulnone 
\par This ammunition - whether it be pebbles, iron shots, arrows, bolts, seeker arrows, or seeker bolts - has big bonuses to-hit and to-damage.
\par 
\par \ul Elemental Brands, Slaying\ulnone 
\par This ammunition works in the same way as melee weapons of the same type: double damage for slay evil and slay animal, triple damage for all other slays and for all elemental brands. Unlike melee weapons, the slays and elemental brands *do* affect the magical damage bonus for ammo.
\par 
\par \ul Backbiting\ulnone 
\par This cursed ammunition will never hit what it is aimed at. Rumour has it that it will curve round and hit the person who shot it in the back: but so far, this rumour has proved unfounded, and is believed to be false.
\par 
\par These are the most common types of ego-weapon: note that they are not the ONLY ego-items available in the dungeon, there may be more.
\par 
\par Apart from these there are some very rare and well made weapons in the dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These include Blades of Chaos, Maces of Disruption, and Scythes of Slicing.  They can also be ego weapons like the ones above.  For example, a Blade of Chaos (Holy Avenger) is much more powerful than many artifact weapons!
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote d3_attack}${\footnote Your Armor Class}+{\footnote d0_attack:4}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Your Armor Class\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Your armor class (or AC) is a number that describes the amount and the quality of armor being worn. Armor class will generally run from about 0 to 150, though exceptionally good armor can improve even on the latter figure.
\par  
\par The larger your armor class, the more protective it is.  A negative armor class would actually help get you hit.  Armor protects you in three manners.  Firstly, it makes you harder to be hit for damage.  A hit for no damage counts as a miss, and is described as a miss.  Secondly, good armor will absorb some of the damage that your character would have taken from normal attacks.  Thirdly, acid damage is reduced by wearing body armor (but the armor will be damaged instead).  It is obvious that a high armor class is vital for surviving the deeper levels of Angband.
\par 
\par Each piece of armour has a base armor value, which, like the damage from weapons, is assumed known by the player, and a magic bonus, which will not be displayed unless the armor has been identified or was bought in a store.
\par 
\par Armor class values are always displayed between a set of square brackets, as "[#]" or "[#,+#]".  The first value is the base armor class of the armor.  The second number is the magical bonus of the item, which is only displayed if known, and will always have a sign preceding the value.  Note that a few rings, amulets, and weapons also have the "[+#]" notation, indicating that they provide an armor bonus.  Many pieces of heavy body armor will also have a "(-#)" (in normal brackets) before the "[#,+#]", which indicates that the weight of the armor decreases your chances of hitting monsters.  This can range from nonexistent for very light armor to (-8) for the heaviest armor!
\par 
\par Some pieces of armor will possess special abilities denoted by the following names:
\par 
\par \ul Resist Acid, Lightning, Fire or Cold\ulnone 
\par A character wearing armor or a shield with one such resistance will take only 1/3 of normal damage from attacks involving the relevant element of acid, lightning, fire or cold. Note that multiple permanent sources of resistance are NOT cumulative: wearing two is no better than wearing one. However, armor which provides resistance to acid cannot itself be damaged by acid, and this is a good reason to wear more than one such piece of armor.
\par  
\par \ul Resistance\ulnone 
\par A character wearing armor with this ability will have resistance to Acid, Cold, Fire, and Lightning as explained in each part above.
\par 
\par \ul Elvenkind\ulnone 
\par This is the same as Resistance armor, only generally better enchanted.  It will make you more stealthy.  This armor also possesses an extra resistance, at random from the following list: poison, light, dark, blindness, confusion, nexus, fear, nether, chaos, disenchantment, sound and shards.
\par  
\par \ul Robes of Permanence\ulnone 
\par These robes are designed especially for wizards.  Just like Elvenkind armor, they provide resistance to fire, cold, acid, and electricity and cannot be damaged by acid.  They sustain all of your stats and protect you from a good deal of all experience draining.  Also like Elvenkind armor, they have one random resistance.
\par 
\par \ul Dragon Scale Mails\ulnone 
\par These extremely rare pieces of armour come in many different colors, each protecting you against the relevant dragons.  Naturally they are all resistant to acid damage.  They also occasionally allow you to breathe as a dragon would!
\par 
\par \ul Stat Boosting Helms\ulnone 
\par There are magical helms found in the dungeon that have the ability to boost the wearer's intelligence, wisdom, or charisma.  Helms of Beauty are the ones that boost charisma.  In addition to boosting the relevant stat these helms will also prevent that stat from being drained.
\par 
\par \ul Crown of the Magi\ulnone 
\par This is the great crown of the wizards.  The wearer will have an increased (and sustained) intelligence, and will also be given resistance against fire, frost, acid, and lightning.  These valuable helms also have an additional random power.
\par 
\par \ul Crown of Might\ulnone 
\par This is the crown of the warriors.  The wearer will have an increased and sustained strength, dexterity, and constitution, and will also be immune to any foe's attempt to slow or paralyze him or her.
\par 
\par \ul Crown of Lordliness\ulnone 
\par This is the great crown of the priests.  The wearer will have an increased and sustained wisdom and charisma.
\par 
\par \ul Helm/Crown of Seeing\ulnone 
\par This is the great helmet or crown of the rogues.  The wearer will be able to see invisible creatures, and will have an increased ability to locate traps and secret doors.  It is also rumored that the wearer of such a helm will not be able to be blinded.
\par 
\par \ul Helm of Infravision\ulnone 
\par This helmet allows the character to see monsters even in total darkness, with the ability to see heat. Note that spellbooks are the same temperature as the surroundings, and so cannot be read unless some real light is present. (Some monsters which are invisible to normal vision can be seen under infravision.)
\par 
\par \ul Helm of Light\ulnone 
\par In addition to providing a permanent light source for the wearer, this helm also provides resistance against light-based attacks.
\par 
\par \ul Helm/Crown of Telepathy\ulnone 
\par This helm or crown grants the wearer the power of telepathy.
\par 
\par \ul Helm of Regeneration\ulnone 
\par This helm will help you regenerate hit points and mana more quickly than normal, allowing you to fight longer before needing to rest.  You will use food faster than normal while wearing this helm because of the regenerative effects.
\par 
\par \ul Helm of Teleportation\ulnone 
\par This cursed helm will always keep the player on the hop, never sure where he is and never able to stay in one place.
\par 
\par \ul Crown of Sickliness\ulnone 
\par Ruling is such a drain on one's health... This crown will debilitate its wearer, reducing his strength, dexterity and constitution.
\par 
\par \ul Stat Reducing Helm/Crown\ulnone 
\par These helms can reduce your wisdom, intelligence or charisma.
\par 
\par \ul Cloak of Protection\ulnone 
\par This finely made cloak will come with an unnaturally high enchantment and is not affected by elemental based attacks. 
\par 
\par \ul Cloak of Stealth\ulnone 
\par This cloak will increase the wearer's stealth, making the wearer less likely to wake up sleeping monsters.
\par 
\par \ul Cloak of Aman\ulnone 
\par These exceptionally rare cloaks provide great stealth, have a very high enchantment, and one random resistance.
\par 
\par \ul Cloak of Enveloping\ulnone 
\par This cloak gets in the way of everything you try to do. You can't seem to hit monsters without having to shove aside several folds of cloth, and yet more layers cushion the blow and reduce the damage you do.
\par 
\par \ul Cloak of Irritation\ulnone 
\par This cloak not only envelops its wearer but aggravates all who see it.
\par 
\par \ul Cloaks of Vulnerability\ulnone 
\par This severely cursed cloak appears to be powerful, but in fact lets through the full force of every attack directed at it.
\par 
\par \ul Gloves of Free Action\ulnone 
\par The wearer of these gloves will find himself resistant to paralyzing attacks as well as some slowing attacks.  Because of the special nature of these gloves, magic users may wear these gloves without incurring a mana penalty.   
\par 
\par \ul Gloves of Slaying\ulnone 
\par These gloves will increase the wearer's fighting ability by boosting the wearer's to-hit and to-dam values.
\par 
\par \ul Gloves of Agility\ulnone 
\par These gloves will increase the wearer's dexterity.  Because of the special nature of these gloves, magic users may wear these gloves without incurring a mana penalty.   
\par 
\par \ul Gauntlets of Power\ulnone 
\par These spiked gauntlets will boost the wearer's strength as well as the wearer's  to-hit and to-dam numbers.
\par 
\par \ul Gauntlets of Weakness\ulnone 
\par These gauntlets sap your strength.
\par 
\par \ul Gauntlets of Clumsiness\ulnone 
\par These gauntlets make you fumble.
\par 
\par \ul Boots of Slow Descent\ulnone 
\par These boots protect the wearer from the effects of small falls.
\par 
\par \ul Boots of Stealth\ulnone 
\par These boots increase the wearer's stealth, like a Cloak of Stealth.
\par 
\par \ul Boots of Free Action\ulnone 
\par The wearer of these boots will find himself resistant to paralyzing attacks as well as some slowing attacks.
\par 
\par \ul Boots of Speed\ulnone 
\par The wearer of these boots will become unnaturally fast.
\par 
\par \ul Boots of Noise\ulnone 
\par The wearer of these boots will make great echoing stamps as he walks around the dungeon, waking up and aggravating all monsters.
\par 
\par \ul Boots of Slowness\ulnone 
\par They seem to be stuck to the ground, and you can hardly move at all while wearing these things.
\par 
\par \ul Boots of Annoyance\ulnone 
\par These boots will both slow the player and aggravate monsters.
\par 
\par As always, these are not necessarily the ONLY ego-items in the dungeon, only the most common.
\par 
\par Apart from these there are some very rare and well-made armours in the dungeon with not necessarily any special abilities. These include Shields of Deflection, Adamantite Plate Mail, Mithril Plate Mail, Mithril Chain Mail, and Shadow Cloaks.  The first four cannot be damaged by acid because of the quality metals they contain.
\par 
\par There are rumors of unique "artifact" items in the dungeon - weapons and armor of all types. Many of these are more powerful than even the greatest ego-items: some are weak and have little more than a name to recommend them.  In all cases, and indeed if the player desires to find out the powers of an ego-item with random powers, use of a scroll of *Identify* will reveal all 
\par the powers of any given item.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote d4_attack}${\footnote Non-Melee Attacks and Resistances}+{\footnote d0_attack:5}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Non-Melee Attacks and Resistances\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 The player may at some time gain access to non-melee attacks, and many monsters also have them. Perhaps the most famous of this type of attack is dragon breath, but monsters may also cast spells at the player, and vice versa. This damage generally is not affected by armor class, and does not need a hit roll to hit the player or monster being aimed at.
\par 
\par Some attacks are purely magical: attack spells which blind, confuse, slow, scare or paralyze the target.  In some cases, a melee attack may also do this.  These attacks are resisted by monsters of higher level (native to deeper dungeon depths) and characters with a high saving throw - saving throws being dependent on class, level and wisdom. There are also available resistances to fear, blindness and confusion, and the power of "free action" prevents magical paralysis and most slowing attacks (the player may still be paralyzed by being "knocked out" in melee or by a stunning attack, but this is very rare.) It should also be noticed that unique monsters automatically pass their saving throws, and some monsters are naturally resistant to confusion, fear and sleep-monster attacks. Monster spells to "cause wounds" are included in this category, of attacks which do no damage if a saving throw is made, or full damage if it is failed.
\par 
\par Some melee attacks by monsters may drain a stat, as can some traps: this is prevented by having that stat sustained.
\par 
\par Some monsters may cast spells that teleport the player character. To these, there is no saving throw, except to those that would actually teleport him up or down one dungeon level. Having resistance to nexus will also prevent being level-teleported, but not normal teleportation spell attacks. The player may teleport monsters in the same way, with a spell, wand or rod.
\par 
\par Other attacks are usually elemental-based, including the aforementioned example of dragon breath. Many monsters can breathe various attacks or cast bolt or ball spells, and the player may also have access to bolt and ball spells (or breathe like a dragon, if he is wearing a dragon scale mail.  The player, and the monsters, may be resistant to these forms of attack: and resistance is handled in different ways for the player and the monster, and for different attack forms.
\par 
\par Bolt spells will hit the first monster (or the player) in the line of fire: ball spells and breaths may centre on a target which may be hiding behind other targets. Ball spells and breath weapons affect an area: other monsters caught in the blast take reduced damage depending on how close to the centre of the blast they are. Bolt and ball spells depend on the level of the monster or player: breath weapons are proportional to a fraction of the monster's current hit points, with a maximum cap on the damage (which is higher for the most common of such attacks, owing to the fact that the resistances are also easier to find.)
\par 
\par In the case of fire, cold, lightning, acid and poison, if the monster has resistance to a player attack of this kind it will take almost no damage.  If the player has one or more permanent sources of resistance, he will take 1/3 of the damage he would normally take: if the player has a temporary source of resistance (whether from potion, spell or artifact), this will also reduce the damage to 1/3 of its normal level, allowing the character to take only 1/9 damage if he has both permanent and temporary resistance.  Having more than one source of permanent resistance confers no extra bonus, and using more than one source of temporary resistance increases only the duration of the resistance: in both cases, either the resistance is present or it is not. But one permanent resistance and one temporary resistance are both effective simultaneously. 
\par 
\par The character may also gain immunity to fire, cold, lightning and acid if he is fortunate to find any of the two or three artifacts that provide these immunities: immunity means that no damage is taken, and the character's equipment is also totally protected. Immunities are EXTREMELY rare, and nothing else can protect the player's equipment or inventory from damage. So expect your armor to take damage from acid attacks even if you yourself are resistant - unless you are wearing armor which cannot be damaged by acid (which may not necessarily provide the resistance to the player, in the case of armor and shields made out of high-quality materials), and expect your staffs, scrolls, spellbooks and arrows to be damaged by fire, your potions by frost, your wands, rings and amulets in your inventory (but not worn or wielded rings or amulets) by lightning, and weapons and armor in the inventory may both be damaged or destroyed by acid and fire.
\par 
\par Another attack that the player will come into contact with all too often is the soul-chilling nature of the undead, which can drain the character's life experience. Some monsters have a life-draining melee attack, others may cast ball or bolt spells or, in extreme cases, breathe the very force of the netherworld (shortened by the game to "nether".) There are two powers which are of assistance in this case: that of "hold life" will prevent 90% of all experience drains, and in the other 10% of cases, the amount of experience lost will be reduced by 90%. That of "resistance to nether forces" will provide resistance to nether bolts, balls and breaths, reducing the damage and preventing any experience drains from these attacks, but has no effect on melee "hits to drain experience".  Monsters caught in the blast from a nether ball or breath will take damage proportional to distance from the centre of the attack, except for undead who are totally immune. The player may find wands or rods of Drain Life, which similarly are ineffective on those undead creatures which have no life to drain: however, the real player equivalent attack spell is the priest/paladin spell of "Orb of Draining", a ball spell which does damage to all monsters, double damage to evil monsters, and is resisted by none.
\par 
\par Other attack forms are rarer, but may include: disenchantment (both in melee or by a monster breath), chaos (a monster breath only, which if unresisted will cause the player to hallucinate and be confused, and may drain life experience), nexus (which may teleport the player to the monster, away from the monster, up or down a level, or swap over two of the player's "internal" stats), confusion breath attack, light and darkness (which will blind a non-resistant character), sound (which will stun a non-resistant character and may destroy his potions), crystal shards (which will cut a non-resistant character and may destroy his potions), inertia (which will slow a character even if he has free action), gravity (which will blink a character, also stunning and slowing), force (which will stun the character), plasma (which will stun, and may destroy items which are vulnerable to either fire or lightning), time (which may drain experience regardless of hold life, or drain stats regardless of sustains), water bolts and balls (which may confuse and stun, and do considerable damage from high-level monsters), ice bolts (which may cut and stun, and damage potions), and mana bolts and balls (the latter usually known as Mana Storms.) Magic missiles are included in the "mana" category, whether cast by the monster or the player.
\par 
\par There are resistances available to chaos, disenchantment, confusion, nexus, sound, shards, light and darkness: all of these will reduce the damage and prevent side-effects other than physical damage. With these resistances, as with nether resistance, damage is a random fraction: for light and dark, it is between 4/7 and 4/12, for sound and confusion it is between 5/7 and 5/12, and for chaos, disenchantment, nexus, shards and nether it is between 6/7 and 6/12. 
\par 
\par It should be noted that not all of these are actually vital to completing the game: indeed, of the above list, only fire, cold, acid, lightning, poison and confusion resists are regarded as truly vital, with blindness, chaos and nether the next most desirable. Some attack forms are not resistable, but thankfully these are rare: resist shards will prevent all other magical attacks which cut (namely ice bolts), and resist sound will prevent all magical stunning (force breath, water bolts and balls, ice bolts, gravity and plasma), and confusion resistance will prevent confusion by a water bolt or ball, but there is no resistance to the physical damage caused by these following attacks: inertia, force, gravity, plasma, time, ice, water, mana.  There is no resistance to any of the side-effects of a time attack, or indeed to anything but the stunning effects of a gravity attack.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote d5_attack}${\footnote A Note on Speed}+{\footnote d0_attack:6}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b A Note on Speed\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Monsters which do not move at normal speed generally move "slowly" (-10 to speed), "fast" (+10), "very fast" (+20) or "incredibly fast" (+30). (It will surprise nobody that Morgoth is one of the few monsters in the last category.)  This is further adjusted by the fact that any given individual monster may have a random adjustment from (-2) to (+2) to its own speed.
\par 
\par Generally, (+10) is exactly double normal speed, and (-10) exactly half.  (+20) is about three times normal speed, but after that there is less noticeable improvement as speed goes higher - for instance, (+30) is not quite four times normal speed, and higher values than this are largely irrelevant. The player may find items which can be worn or wielded that provide speed bonuses: these may include boots of speed, rings of speed and a few very rare artifacts. Boots will provide a random 1d10 to speed: rings of speed may be bigger than that - generally the best that the player will get is two just over (+10), but individual rings of up to (+22) speed have been known (although the record cursed one is much higher, at (-56): only one unsuccessful roll away from being a (+56) ring...)
\par 
\par Separate from the question of permanent speed (as determined by the player's speed items and the monster's natural speed) is that of temporary speed. The player may cast a spell of haste-self, or use a potion, staff or rod of speed or use an artifact activation to speed him temporarily: or a monster may cast a haste-self spell, or be affected by another monster "shrieking for help" or the player reading a scroll of aggravate monster. In all cases, (+10) speed is added temporarily to the affected monster or player. Using two or more sources of temporary speed is cumulative only in duration - one cannot get from normal speed to (+20) using a potion and a spell of speed. Spells of temporary slowing (including monsters breathing inertia or gravity) are handled the same way, with exactly (-10) being subtracted from the player or monster's speed temporarily, for the duration of the spell or breath's effect.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z37}${\footnote 37}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 37\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z38}${\footnote 38}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 38\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z39}${\footnote 39}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 39\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z40}${\footnote 40}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 40\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z41}${\footnote 41}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 41\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z42}${\footnote 42}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 42\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote z43}${\footnote 43}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b 43\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote e1_playing}${\footnote Keyset Command Summaries}+{\footnote e0_playing:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Keyset Command Summaries\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\b\fs20 Original Keyset Command Summary\b0 
\par 
\par \f1 a  Aim a wand                    A  Activate an artifact
\par b  Browse a book                 B  Bash a door
\par c  Close a door                  C  Character description
\par d  Drop an item                  D  Disarm a trap
\par e  Equipment list                E  Eat some food
\par f  Fire an item                  F  Fuel your lantern/torch
\par g  Stay still (flip pickup)      G  Gain new spells/prayers
\par h  (unused)                      H  (unused)
\par i  Inventory list                I  Observe an item
\par j  Jam a door                    J  (unused)
\par k  Destroy an item               K  (unused)
\par l  Look around                   L  Locate player on map
\par m  Cast a spell                  M  Full dungeon map
\par n  (unused)                      N  (unused)
\par o  Open a door or chest          O  (unused)
\par p  Pray a prayer                 P  (unused)
\par q  Quaff a potion                Q  Quit (commit suicide)
\par r  Read a scroll                 R  Rest for a period
\par s  Search for traps/doors        S  Toggle search mode
\par t  Take off equipment            T  Dig a tunnel
\par u  Use a staff                   U  (unused)
\par v  Throw an item                 V  Version info
\par w  Wear/wield equipment          W  (unused)
\par x  (unused)                      X  (unused)
\par y  (unused)                      Y  (unused)
\par z  Zap a rod                     Z  (unused)
\par !  Interact with system         ^A  (special - debug command)
\par @  Interact with macros         ^B  (unused)
\par #  (unused)                     ^C  (special - break)
\par $  User interface               ^D  (unused)
\par %  Interact with visuals        ^E  Toggle choice window
\par ^  (special - control key)      ^F  Repeat level feeling
\par &  Interact with colors         ^G  (unused)
\par *  Target monster or location   ^H  (unused)
\par (  Load screen dump             ^I  (special - tab)
\par )  Dump screen dump             ^J  (special - linefeed)
\par \{  Inscribe an object           ^K  (unused)
\par \}  Uninscribe an object         ^L  (unused)
\par [  (unused)                     ^M  (special - return)
\par ]  (unused)                     ^N  (unused)
\par -  Walk (flip pickup)           ^O  (unused)
\par _  Enter store                  ^P  Show previous messages
\par +  Alter grid                   ^Q  (unused)
\par =  Set options                  ^R  Redraw the screen
\par ;  Walk (with pickup)           ^S  Save and don't quit
\par :  Take notes                   ^T  (unused)
\par '  (unused)                     ^U  (unused)
\par "  Enter a user pref command    ^V  Repeat last command
\par ,  Stay still (with pickup)     ^W  (special - wizard mode)
\par <  Go up staircase              ^X  Save and quit
\par .  Run                          ^Y  (unused)
\par >  Go down staircase            ^Z  (special - borg command)
\par \\  (special - bypass keymap)     |  (unused)
\par `  (special - escape)            ~  Check knowledge
\par /  Identify symbol               ?  Help\f0 
\par 
\par \b Roguelike Keyset Command Summary\b0 
\par 
\par \f1 a  Zap a rod (Activate)          A  Activate an artifact
\par b  (walk - south west)           B  (run - south west)
\par c  Close a door                  C  Character description
\par d  Drop an item                  D  Disarm a trap or chest
\par e  Equipment list                E  Eat some food
\par f  Bash a door (force)           F  Fuel your lantern/torch
\par g  Stay still (flip pickup)      G  Gain new spells/prayers
\par h  (walk - west)                 H  (run - west)
\par i  Inventory list                I  Observe an item
\par j  (walk - south)                J  (run - south)
\par k  (walk - north)                K  (run - north)
\par l  (walk - east)                 L  (run - east)
\par m  Cast a spell                  M  Full dungeon map
\par n  (walk - south east)           N  (run - south east)
\par o  Open a door or chest          O  (unused)
\par p  Pray a prayer                 P  Browse a book
\par q  Quaff a potion                Q  Quit (commit suicide)
\par r  Read a scroll                 R  Rest for a period
\par s  Search for traps/doors        S  Jam a door (Spike)
\par t  Fire an item                  T  Take off equipment
\par u  (walk - north east)           U  (run - north east)
\par v  Throw an item                 V  Version info
\par w  Wear/wield equipment          W  Locate player on map (Where)
\par x  Look around                   X  (unused)
\par y  (walk - north west)           Y  (run - north west)
\par z  Aim a wand (Zap)              Z  Use a staff (Zap)
\par !  Interact with system         ^A  (special - debug command)
\par @  Interact with macros         ^B  (alter - south west)
\par #  Toggle search mode           ^C  (special - break)
\par $  (unused)                     ^D  Destroy item
\par %  Interact with visuals        ^E  Toggle choice window
\par ^  (special - control key)      ^F  Repeat level feeling
\par &  Interact with colors         ^G  (unused)
\par *  Target monster or location   ^H  (alter - west)
\par (  Load screen dump             ^I  (special - tab)
\par )  Dump screen dump             ^J  (alter - south)
\par \{  Inscribe an object           ^K  (alter - north)
\par \}  Uninscribe an object         ^L  (alter - east)
\par [  (unused)                     ^M  (special - return)
\par ]  (unused)                     ^N  (alter - south east)
\par -  Walk (flip pickup)           ^O  (unused)
\par _  Enter store                  ^P  Show previous messages
\par +  Alter grid                   ^Q  (unused)
\par =  Set options                  ^R  Redraw the screen
\par ;  Walk (with pickup)           ^S  Save and don't quit
\par :  Take notes                   ^T  Dig a Tunnel
\par '  (unused)                     ^U  (alter - north east)
\par "  Enter a user pref command    ^V  Repeat last command
\par ,  Run                          ^W  (special - wizard mode)
\par <  Go up staircase              ^X  Save and quit
\par .  Stay still (with pickup)     ^Y  (alter - north west)
\par >  Go down staircase            ^Z  (special - borg command)
\par \\  (special - bypass keymap)     |  (unused)
\par `  (special - escape)            ~  Check knowledge
\par /  Identify symbol               ?  Help
\par \f0 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote e2_playing}${\footnote Special Keys}+{\footnote e0_playing:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Special Keys\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Certain special keys may be intercepted by the operating system or the host machine, causing unexpected results.  In general, these special keys are control keys, and often, you can disable their special effects.
\par 
\par If you are playing on a UNIX or similar system, then Ctrl-C will interrupt Angband.  The second and third interrupt will induce a warning bell, and the fourth will induce both a warning bell and a special message, since the fifth will quit the game, after killing your character.  Also, Ctrl-Z will suspend the game, and return you to the original command shell, until you resume the game with the "fg" command.  There is now a compilation option to force the game to prevent the "double ctrl-z escape death trick".  The Ctrl-\\ and Ctrl-D and Ctrl-S keys should not be intercepted.
\par  
\par It is often possible to specify "control-keys" without actually pressing the control key, by typing a caret ("^") followed by the key.  This is useful for specifying control-key commands which might be caught by the operating system as explained above.
\par 
\par Pressing backslash ("\\") before a command will bypass all keymaps, and the next keypress will be interpreted as an "underlying command" key, unless it is a caret ("^"), in which case the keypress after that will be turned into a control-key and interpreted as a command in the underlying angband keyset.  The backslash key is useful for creating macro actions which are not affected by any keymap definitions that may be in force, for example, the sequence "\\" + "." + "6" will always mean "run east", even if the "." key has been mapped to a different underlying command.
\par 
\par The "0" and "^" and "\\" keys all have special meaning when entered at the command prompt, and there is no "useful" way to specify any of them as an "underlying command", which is okay, since they would have no effect.
\par 
\par For many input requests or queries, the special character ESCAPE will abort the command.  The "[y/n]" prompts may be answered with "y" or "n", or escape.  The "-more-" message prompts may be cleared (after reading the displayed message) by pressing ESCAPE, SPACE, RETURN, LINEFEED, or by any keypress, if the "quick_messages" option is turned on.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote e3_playing}${\footnote Command Counts}+{\footnote e0_playing:4}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Command Counts\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Some commands can be executed a fixed number of times by preceding them with a count.  Counted commands will execute until the count expires, until you type any character, or until something significant happens, such as being attacked.  Thus, a counted command doesn't work to attack another creature.  While the command is being repeated, the number of times left to be repeated will flash by on the line at the bottom of the screen.
\par 
\par To give a count to a command, type 0, the repeat count, and then the command.  If you want to give a movement command and you are using the original command set (where the movement commands are digits), press space after the count and you will be prompted for the command.
\par  
\par Counted commands are very useful for time consuming commands, as they automatically terminate on success, or if you are attacked.  You may also terminate any counted command (or resting or running), by typing any character.  This character is ignored, but it is safest to use a SPACE or ESCAPE which are always ignored as commands in case you type the command just after the count expires.
\par 
\par You can tell Angband to automatically use a repeat count of 99 with commands you normally want to repeat (open, disarm, tunnel, bash, alter, etc) by setting the "always_repeat" option.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote e4_playing}${\footnote Selection of Objects}+{\footnote e0_playing:5}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Selection of Objects\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Many commands will also prompt for a particular object to be used.  For example, the command to read a scroll will ask you which of the scrolls that you are carrying that you wish to read.  In such cases, the selection is made by typing a letter of the alphabet.  The prompt will indicate the possible letters, and will also allow you to type the key "*", which causes all of the available options to be described.  The list of choices will also be shown in the Choice window, if you are using a windows environment and windows are turned on.  Often you will be able to press "/" to select an object from your equipment instead of your inventory.  Pressing space once will have the same effect as "*", and the second time will cancel the command and run the "i" or "e" command.
\par 
\par The particular object may be selected by an upper case or a lower case letter.  If lower case is used, the selection takes place immediately.  If upper case is used, then the particular option is described, and you are given the option of confirming or retracting that choice.  Upper case selection is thus safer, but requires an extra key stroke.  Also see the "!*" and "!x" inscriptions, below.
\par 
\par For many commands, you can also use "-" to select an object on the floor where you are standing.  This lets you read scrolls or quaff potions, for example, off the dungeon floor without picking them up.
\par 
\par If you enter a number between 0 and 9, the first item engraved with "@#" where "#" is the number you entered will be selected.  For example, if you have a shovel engraved with "@0" and you type "w" (for wield) and then 0, you will wield the shovel.  This is very useful for macros (see below), since you can use this to select an object regardless of its location in your pack.  For example, Angband automatically defines a macro for the key "X" to do "w0".  If you then engrave both your digging instrument and your primary weapon with @0, pressing X will wield whichever one is not being currently wielded (letting you quickly switch between them).  Multiple numbers can be engraved on the same object; for example, if a sword is engraved with @1@0, then either "w1" or "w0" will wield it.  Normally, you inscribe "@1@0" on your primary weapon, and "@2@0" on your digger or secondary weapon.  Note that an inscription containing "@x#" will act like "@#" but only when the current "Angband command" is "x".  Thus you can put "@z4" on a rod and "@u4" on a staff, and then use both "z4" and "u4" as desired.
\par 
\par Note that any object containing "!x" in its inscription, where "x" is the current "angband command" (or containing "!*" ever) will induce "verification" whenever that object is "selected".  Thus, inscribing, say, "!f!k!d" on an object will greatly reduce the odds of you "losing" it by accident, and inscribing "!*" on an object will allow you to be very paranoid about the object.  Note that "selling" and "dropping" both use the "d" command.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote e5_playing}${\footnote User Pref Files}+{\footnote e0_playing:6}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b User Pref Files\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Angband allows you to change various aspects of the game to suit your tastes.  You may define keymaps (changing the way Angband maps your keypresses to underlying commands), create macros (allowing you to map a single keypress to a series of keypresses), modify the visuals (allowing you to change the appearance of monsters, objects, or terrain features), change the colors (allowing you to make a given color brighter, darker, or even completely different), or set options (turning them off or on).
\par 
\par Angband stores your preferences in files called "user pref files", which contain comments and "user pref commands", which are simple strings describing one aspect of the system about which the user has a preference.  There are many ways to load a user pref file, and in fact, some of these files are automatically loaded for you by the game.  All of the files are kept in the "lib/user/" directory, though you may have to use one of the command line arguments to redirect this directory, especially on multiuser systems.  You may also enter single user pref commands directly, using the special "Enter a user pref command" command, activated by "double quote".  You may have to use the "redraw" command (^R) after changing certain of the aspects of the game, to allow Angband to adapt to your changes.
\par 
\par When the game starts up, after you have loaded an old character, or created a new character, some user pref files are loaded automatically.  First, the "pref.prf" file is loaded.  This file contains some user pref commands which will work on all platforms.  Then one of "font-xxx.prf" (for normal usage) or "graf-xxx.prf" (for bitmap usage) is loaded.  These files contain attr/char changes to allow the monsters, objects, and/or terrain features to look "better" on your system.  Then the "pref-xxx.prf" file is loaded.  This file contains pre-defined system specific stuff (macros, color definitions, etc).  Then, the "user-xxx.prf" file is loaded.  This file contains user-defined system specific stuff.  The "user-xxx.prf" file is used as the "default" user pref file in many places.  The "xxx" is the "system suffix" for your system, taken from the "main-xxx.c" file which was used to generate your executable.  Finally, the "Race.prf", "Class.prf", and "Name.prf" files are loaded, where "Race", "Class", and "Name" are replaced by the actual race, class, and name of the current character.
\par 
\par Several commands allow you to both load existing user pref files, create new user pref files, append information to existing user pref files, and/or interact with various of the user preferences in a more intuitive way than the user pref commands allow.  The commands include "Interact with macros" (@), "Interact with visuals" (%), and "Interact with colors" (&), described below.
\par 
\par 
\par \b Macros\b0 
\par 
\par The "Interact with macros" command allows you to define or remove "macros", which are mappings from a single logical keypress to a sequence of keypresses, allowing you to use special keys on the keyboard, such as function keys or keypad keys, possibly in conjunction with modifier keys, to "automate" repetitive multi-keypress commands that you use a lot.
\par 
\par Since macros represent keypress sequences, and not all keypresses have a printable representation, macro triggers and actions must often be "encoded" into a human readible form.  This is done using several types of encoding, including "\\xHH" for character number HH in hexidecimal, "\\e" for the "escape" code, "\\n" for the "newline" code, "\\r" for the "return" code, "\\s" for the "space" code, "\\\\" for backslash, "\\^" for caret, and "^X" for the code for any "control" key "ctrl-X".  Note that the "action" of a macro will not be checked against other macro triggers (unless the macro action contains a "control-backslash"), so you cannot make infinite loops.  You may specify extremely long macros, but you are limited in length by the underlying input mechanisms, which in general limit you to about 1024 keys in both triggers and actions.
\par 
\par The special "\\" command (which must be encoded in macros as "\\\\") is very useful in macros, since it bypasses all keymaps and allows the next keystroke to be considered a command in the underlying Angband command set.  For a list of the Angband command set, see the "command.txt" help file.  For example, a macro which maps Shift-KP6 to "\\" + "." + "6" will induce the "run east" behavior, regardless of what keyset the user has chosen, and regardless of what keymaps have been defined.
\par 
\par Macros can be specified in user pref files as a pair of lines, one of the form "A:<str>", which defines the encoded macro action, and one of the form "P:<str>", which defines the encoded macro trigger.
\par 
\par 
\par \b Keymaps\b0 
\par 
\par The "Interact with macros" command also allows you to define \i keymaps\i0 , which are vaguely related to macros.  A keymap maps a single keypress to a series of keypresses, which bypass both other keymaps and any macros.  Angband uses keymaps to map the original and the roguelike keysets to the underlying command set, and allows the user to modify or
\par add keymaps of their own.  Note that all keymap actions must be specified using underlying commands, not keypresses from the original or roguelike keysets.  The original keyset is almost identical to the underlying keyset, except that numbers are mapped to ";" plus a direction, "5" is mapped to ",", and a few control-keys are mapped to various things.  See {\uldb Command Descriptions}{\v !JumpID()} for the full set of underlying commands.  Some uses for keymaps include the ability to disable a command by mapping it to "\\x00".
\par 
\par Keymaps can be specified in user pref files as line of the form "M:<T> <key> <str>", where <T> is the keyset (0/1 for original/roguelike), <key> is the encoded trigger key, and <str> is the encoded keymap action.
\par 
\par 
\par \b Visuals\b0 
\par 
\par You can use the "Interact with visuals" command to change various visual information, currently including the choice of what attr/char values are used to represent various monsters, objects, or terrain features.  Note that in combination appropriate support in "main-xxx.c", and with the use of the "use_graphics" flag, you may be able to specify that "graphic bitmaps" should be used instead of normal "colored characters" for various things.
\par 
\par When interactively modifying the attr/char values for monsters, objects, or terrain features, pressing "n" or "N" will change which entry you are changing, pressing "a" or "A" will rotate through the available attr values, and pressing "c" or "C" will rotate though the available char values.  Note that attr/char values with the "high bit" set may induce the display of special "graphic" pictures if the "use_graphics" flag is set, and your system supports the "use_graphics" flag.
\par 
\par Note that this command can be abused in various ways, and if you must do so, remember that you are only cheating yourself.
\par 
\par Keymaps can be specified in user pref files as line of the form "R:<N>:<A>/<C>" or "K:<N>:<A>/<C>" or "F:<N>:<A>/<C>" or "U:<N>:<A>/<C>".
\par 
\par 
\par \b Colors\b0 
\par 
\par The "Interact with colors" command allows you to change the actual internal values used to display various colors.  This command may or may not have any effect on your machine.  Advanced machines may allow you to change the actual RGB values used to represent each of the 16 colors used by Angband, and perhaps even allow you to define new colors which are not currently used by Angband.
\par 
\par Colors can be specified in user pref files as line of the form "V:<N>:<V>:<R>:<G>:<B>".
\par 
\par 
\par \b Options\b0 
\par 
\par The "Interact with options" command allows you to turn options on or off.  You may turn options off or on using the user pref commands of the form "X:<option>" or "Y:<option>" respectively.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f1_command}${\footnote Inventory Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Inventory Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Inventory list (i)\ulnone 
\par Displays a list of objects being carried but not equipped.  You can carry up to 23 different items, not counting those in your equipment.  Often, many identical objects can be "stacked" into a "pile" which will count as a single item.  This is always true of things like potions, scrolls, and food, but you may have to set options to allow wands, staves, and other such objects to stack.  Each object has a weight, and if you carry more objects than your strength permits, you will begin to slow down.
\par  
\par \ul Equipment list (e)\ulnone 
\par Use this command to display a list of the objects currently being used by your character.  Your character has 12 slots for equipment, each corresponding to a different location on the body, and each of which may contain only a single object at a time, and each of which may only contain objects of the proper "type", and which include WIELD (weapon), BOW (missile launcher), LEFT (ring), RIGHT (ring), NECK (amulet), LITE (light source), BODY (armor), OUTER (cloak), ARM (shield), HEAD (helmet), HANDS (gloves), FEET (boots).  You must be wielding/wearing certain objects to take advantage of their special powers.
\par 
\par \ul Drop an item (d)\ulnone 
\par This drops an item from your inventory or equipment onto the dungeon floor.  If the floor spot you are standing on already has an object in it, Angband will attempt to drop the item onto an adjacent space.  Be warned that if the floor is full and you attempt to drop something, it may disappear and be destroyed.  Doors and traps are considered objects for the purpose of determining if the space is occupied.  This command may take a quantity, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Destroy an item (k) or Destroy an item (^D)\ulnone 
\par This destroys an item in your inventory or on the dungeon floor.  If the selected pile contains multiple objects, you may specify a quantity.  You must always (currently) verify this command.  This command may take a quantity, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Wear/Wield equipment (w)\ulnone 
\par To wear or wield an object in your inventory, use this command.  Since only one object can be in each slot at a time, if you wear or wield an item into a slot which is already occupied, the old item will be first be taken off, and may in fact be dropped if there is no room for it in your inventory.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Take off equipment (t) or Take off equipment (T)\ulnone 
\par Use this command to take off a piece of equipment and return it to your inventory.  Occasionally, you will run into a cursed item which cannot be removed.  These items normally penalize you in some way and cannot be taken off until the curse is removed.  If there is no room in your inventory for the item, your pack will overflow and you will drop the item after taking it off.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f2_commands}${\footnote Movement Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Movement Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Walk (with pickup) (;)\ulnone 
\par Moves one step in the given direction.  The square you are moving into must not be blocked by walls or doors.  You will pick up any items in the destination grid if the "always_pickup" option is set, or if the "query_pickup" option is set and you respond correctly.  You may also use the "original" direction keys (both keysets) or the "roguelike" direction keys (roguelike keyset) to walk in a direction.  This command may take a count, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Walk (flip pickup) (-)\ulnone 
\par This is just like normal move, except that the "Pick things up" option is inverted.  In other words, if you normally pick up anything you encounter (the default), you will not pick things up when using this command.  If you normally do not pick things up, you will when using this command.  This command may take a count, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Run (.) or Run (,)\ulnone 
\par This command will move in the given direction, following any bends in the corridor, until you either have to make a "choice" between two directions or you are disturbed.  You can configure what will disturb you by setting the disturbance options.  You may also use shift plus the "roguelike" direction keys (roguelike keyset), or shift plus the "original" direction keys on the keypad (both keysets, some machines) to run in a direction.  This command may take an argument, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Go up staircase (<)\ulnone 
\par Climbs up an up staircase you are standing on.  There is always at least one staircase going up on every level except for the town level (this doesn't mean it's easy to find).  Going up a staircase will take you to a new dungeon level unless you are at 50 feet (dungeon level 1), in which case you will return to the town level.  Note that whenever you leave a level (not the town), you will never find it again.  This means that for all intents and purposes, any objects on that level are destroyed.  This includes artifacts unless the "Create characters in preserve mode" option was set when your character was created, in which case the artifacts may show up again later.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Go down staircase (>)\ulnone 
\par Descends a down staircase you are standing on.  There are always at least two staircases going down on each level, except for the town which has only one, and "quest" levels, which have none until the quest monster is killed.  Going down a staircase will take you to a new dungeon level.  See "Go Up Staircase" for more info.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f3_commands}${\footnote Resting & Searching Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:4}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Resting & Searching Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\b\fs20 Resting Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Stay still (with pickup) (,) or Stay still (with pickup) (.)\ulnone 
\par Stays in the same square for one move.  If you normally pick up objects you encounter, you will pick up whatever you are standing on.  You may also use the "5" key (both keysets).  This command may take a count, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Stay still (flip pickup) (g)\ulnone 
\par Stays in the same square for one move.  If you normally pick up objects you encounter, you will not pick up whatever you are standing on.  If you normally do not pick up objects, you will pick up what you are standing on.  This command is normally only used when the "always_pickup" option is false.  This command may take a count, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Rest (R)\ulnone 
\par Resting is better for you than repeatedly staying still, and can be told to automatically stop after a certain amount of time, or when various conditions are met.  In any case, you always wake up when anything disturbing happens, or when you press any key.  To rest, enter the Rest command, followed by the number of turns you want to rest, or "*" to rest until your hitpoints and mana are restored, or "&" to rest until you are fully "healed".  This command may take an argument (used for the number of turns to rest), and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \b Searching Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Search (s)\ulnone 
\par This command can be used to locate hidden traps and secret doors in the spaces adjacent to the player.  More than a single turn of searching will be required in most cases.  You should always search a chest before trying to open it, since they are generally trapped.  This command can take a count, which is useful if you are fairly sure of finding something eventually, since the command stops as soon as anything is found.  This command may take a count, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Toggle search mode (S) or Toggle search mode (#)\ulnone 
\par This command will take you into and out of search mode.  When first pressed, the message "Searching" will appear at the bottom of the screen.  You are now taking two turns for each command, one for the command and one turn to search.  This means that you are taking twice the time to move around the dungeon, and therefore twice the food.  Search mode will automatically turn off if you are disturbed.  You may also turn off search mode by entering the Search Mode command again.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f4_commands}${\footnote Alter Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:5}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Alter Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Tunnel (T) or Tunnel (^T)\ulnone 
\par Tunnelling or mining is a very useful art.  There are many kinds of rock, with varying hardness, including permanent rock (permanent), granite (very hard), quartz veins (hard), magma veins (soft), and rubble (very soft).  Quartz and Magma veins may be displayed in a special way, and may sometimes contain treasure, in which case they will be displayed in a different way.  Rubble sometimes covers an object.  It is hard to tunnel unless you are wielding a heavy weapon or a shovel or a pick.  Tunnelling ability increases with strength and weapon weight.  This command may take a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Open a door or chest (o)\ulnone 
\par To open an object such as a door or chest, you must use this command.  If the object is locked, you will attempt to pick the lock based on your disarming ability.  If you open a trapped chest without disarming the traps first, the trap will be set off.  Some doors will be jammed shut and may have to be forced open.  You may need several tries to open a door or chest.  This command may take a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Close a door (c)\ulnone 
\par Non-intelligent and some other creatures cannot open doors, so shutting doors can be quite valuable.  Broken doors cannot be closed.  Bashing a door open may break it.  This command may take a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Jam a door (j) or Spike a door (S)\ulnone 
\par Many monsters can simply open closed doors, and can eventually get through a locked door.  You may therefore occasionally want to jam a door shut with iron spikes.  Each spike used on the door will make it harder to bash down the door, up to a certain limit.  Smaller monsters are less able to bash down doors.  In order to use this command, you must be carrying iron spikes.  This command requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Bash a door (B) or Force a door (f)\ulnone 
\par This command allows you to bash down jammed doors.  Your bashing ability increases with strength.  Bashing open a door can (briefly) throw you off balance.  Doors that are stuck, or which have been jammed closed with spikes can only be opened by bashing, and all closed doors can be bashed open if desired.  Bashing a door open may permanently break it so that it can never be closed.  This command may take a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Disarm a trap or chest (D)\ulnone 
\par You can attempt to disarm traps on the floor or on chests.  If you fail, there is a chance that you will blunder and set it off.  You can only disarm a trap after you have found it (usually with the Search command).  This command may take a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Alter (+)\ulnone 
\par This special command allows the use of a single keypress to select any of the "obvious" commands above (attack, tunnel, bash, open, disarm, close), and, by using macros or keymaps, to combine this keypress with directions.  In general, this allows the use of the "control" key plus the appropriate "direction" key (including the roguelike direction keys in roguelike mode) as a kind of generic "alter the terrain feature of an adjacent grid" command.  This command may take a count, is affected by the "always_repeat" option, requires a direction, and takes some energy.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f5_commands}${\footnote Spell & Prayer Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:6}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Spell & Prayer Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Browse a book (b) or Peruse a book (P)\ulnone 
\par Only mages, rogues, and rangers can read magic books, and only priests and paladins can read prayer books.  Warriors cannot read any books.  When this command is used, all of the spells or prayers contained in the selected book are displayed, along with information such as their level, the amount of mana required to cast them, and whether or not you know the spell or prayer.
\par 
\par \ul Gain new spells or prayers (G)\ulnone 
\par Use this command to actually learn new spells or prayers.  When you are able to learn new spells or prayers, the word "Study" will appear on the status line at the bottom of the screen.  If you have a book in your possession containing spells or prayers which you may learn, then you may choose to study that book.  If you are a mage, rogue, or ranger, you may actually choose which spell to study.  If you are a priest or paladin, your gods will choose a prayer for you.  There are nine books of each type, five of which are normally found only in the dungeon. This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Cast a spell (m)\ulnone 
\par To cast a spell, you must have previously learned the spell and must have in your inventory a book from which the spell can be read.  Each spell has a chance of failure which starts out fairly large but decreases as you gain levels.  If you don't have enough mana to cast a spell, you will be prompted for confirmation.  If you decide to go ahead, the chance of failure is greatly increased, and you may lose a point of constitution.  Since you must read the spell from a book, you cannot be blind or confused while casting, and there must be some light present.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Pray a prayer (p)\ulnone 
\par To pray effectively, you must have previously learned the prayer and must have in your inventory a book from which the prayer can be read.  Each prayer has a chance of being ignored which starts out fairly large but decreases as you gain levels.  If you don't have enough mana to cast a spell, you will be prompted for confirmation.  If you decide to go ahead, the chance of failure is greatly increased, and you may lose a point of constitution.  Since you must read the prayer from a book, you cannot be blind or confused while praying, and there must be some light present.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f6_commands}${\footnote Object Manipulation Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:7}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Object Manipulation Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Eat some food (E)\ulnone 
\par You must eat regularly to prevent starvation.  As you grow hungry, a message will appear at the bottom of the screen saying "Hungry".  If you go hungry long enough, you will become weak, then start fainting, and eventually, you may will die of starvation.  You may use this command to eat food in your inventory.  Note that you can sometimes find food in the dungeon, but it is not always wise to eat strange food.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Fuel your lantern/torch (F)\ulnone 
\par If you are using a torch and have more torches in your pack, or you are using a lantern and have flasks of oil in your pack, then your can "refuel" them with this command.  Torches and Lanterns are limited in their maximal fuel.  In general, two flasks will fully fuel a lantern and two torches will fully fuel a torch.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Quaff a potion (q)\ulnone 
\par Use this command to drink a potion.  Potions affect the player in various ways, but the effects are not always immediately obvious.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Read a scroll (r)\ulnone 
\par Use this command to read a scroll.  Scroll spells usually have an area effect, except for a few cases where they act on other objects.  Reading a scroll causes the parchment to disintegrate as the scroll takes effect.  Most scrolls which prompt for more information can be aborted (by pressing escape), which will stop reading the scroll before it disintegrates.  This command takes some energy.
\par  
\par \ul Inscribe an object (\{) \ulnone 
\par This command inscribes a string on an object.  The inscription is displayed inside curly braces after the object description.  The inscription is limited to the particular object (or pile) and is not automatically transferred to all similar objects.  Under certain circumstances, Angband will display "fake" inscriptions on certain objects ("cursed", "broken", "tried", "empty", "NN% off") when appropriate.  These "fake" inscriptions remain all the time, even if the player chooses to add a "real" inscription on top of it later.
\par 
\par In addition, Angband will occasionally place a "real" inscription on an object for you, normally as the result of your character getting a "feeling" about the item.  All characters will get "feelings" about weapons and armor after carrying them for a while.  Warriors (who  understand weapons and armor best) get the most detailed feelings, and get them faster than other classes. Rogues (used to handling all sorts of stolen goods) are also very good, as are paladins (basically warriors who are religious).  Rangers are not so well-versed in melee weapons, being normally people of the outdoors and the wilderness who prefer archery and camouflage to heavy metal armor and weaponry, while priests and mages simply are not experienced enough in matters concerning melee to be able to tell much about an item - though a priest will realise the extent of his knowledge fairly quickly, as they are often called upon to fight for their faith and have learned a little from these experiences and divine insight.  Mages, frankly, haven't a clue. But then, they don't need it when they can learn the spell of Identify very early on in the game.
\par 
\par An item labeled as "\{empty\}" was found to be out of charges, and an item labeled as "\{tried\}" is a "flavored" item which the character has used, but whose effects are unknown.  Certain inscriptions have a meaning to the game, see "@#", "@x#", "!*", and "!x", in the section on inventory object selection.
\par 
\par \ul Uninscribe an object (\})\ulnone 
\par This command removes the inscription on an object.  This command will have no effect on "fake" inscriptions added by the game itself.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f7_command}${\footnote Magical Object, Throwing, & Missile Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:8}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Magical Object, Throwing, & Missile Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\b\fs20 Magical Object Commands\b0 
\par \ul 
\par Activate an artifact (A)\ulnone 
\par You have heard rumors of special weapons and armor deep in the Pits, items that can let you breathe fire like a dragon or light rooms with just a thought.  Should you ever be lucky enough to find such an item, this command will let you activate its special ability.  Special abilities can only be used if you are wearing or wielding the item.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Aim a wand (a) or Zap a wand (z)\ulnone 
\par Wands must be aimed in a direction to be used.  Wands are magical devices, and therefore there is a chance you will not be able to figure out how to use them if you aren't good with magical devices.  They will fire a shot that affects the first object or creature encountered or fire a beam that affects anything in a given direction, depending on the wand.  An obstruction such as a door or wall will generally stop the effects from traveling any farther.  This command requires a direction and can use a target.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Use a staff (u) or Zap a staff (Z)\ulnone 
\par This command will use a staff.  A staff is normally very similar to a scroll, in that they normally either have an area effect or affect a specific object.  Staves are magical devices, and there is a chance you will not be able to figure out how to use them.  This command takes some energy.
\par  
\par \ul Zap a rod (z) or Activate a rod (a)\ulnone 
\par Rods are extremely powerful magical items, which cannot be burnt or shattered, and which can have either staff-like or wand-like effects, but unlike staves and wands, they don't have charges.  Instead, they draw on the ambient magical energy to recharge themselves, and therefore can only be activated once every few turns.  The recharging time varies depending on the type of rod.  This command may require a direction (depending on the type of rod, and whether you are aware of its type) and can use a target.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par 
\par \b Throwing and Missile Weapon Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Fire an item (f) or Fire an item (t)\ulnone 
\par You may throw any object carried by your character.  Depending on the weight, it may travel across the room or drop down beside you.  Only one object from a pile will be thrown at a time.  Note that throwing an object will often cause it to break, so be careful!  If you throw something at a creature, your chances of hitting it are determined by your pluses to hit, your ability at throwing, and the object's pluses to hit.  Once the creature is it, the object may or may not do any damage to it.  You've heard rumors that some objects found in the dungeon can do huge amounts of damage when thrown, but you're not sure which objects those are....  Note that flasks of oil will do a fairly large chunk of damage to a monster on impact, supposedly representing fire damage, but it works against fire elementals too - not that it's exactly worth it by that stage of dungeon exploration.  If you are wielding a missile launcher compatible with the object you are throwing, then you automatically use the launcher to fire the missile with much higher range, accuracy, and damage, then you would get by just throwing the missile.  Fire or Throw requires a direction.  Targeting mode (see the next command) can be invoked with "*" at the "Direction?" prompt.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Throw an item (v)\ulnone 
\par You may throw any object carried by your character.  The lighter the object, the farther you can throw it.  Only one object from a stack may be thrown at a time.  Throwing an object may break it.  If you throw something at a monster, your chances of hitting it are determined by your pluses to hit, your ability at throwing, and the object's pluses to hit.  If the object hits the monster, it may or may not do damage.  Some objects, such as weapons, or flasks of oil, can do a substantial amount of damage.  This command requires a direction, and can take a target.  This command takes some energy.
\par 
\par \ul Targeting Mode (*)\ulnone 
\par This will allow you to aim your spells and such at a specific monster or grid, so that you can point directly towards that monster or grid (even if this is not a "compass" direction) when you are asked for a direction.  You can set a target using this command, or you can set a new target at the "Direction?" prompt when appropriate.  At the targeting prompt, you have many options.  First of all, targetting mode starts targetting nearby monsters which can be reached by "projectable" spells and thrown objects.  In this mode, you can press "t" (or "5" or ".") to select the current monster, space to advance to the next monster, "-" to back up to the previous monster, direction keys to advance to a monster more or less in that direction, "r" to "recall" the current monster, "q" to exit targetting mode, and "p" (or "o") to stop targetting monsters and enter the mode for targetting a location on the floor or in a wall.  Note that if there are no nearby monsters, you will automatically enter this mode.  Note that hitting "o" is just like "p", except that the location cursor starts on the last examined monster instead of on the player.  In this mode, you use the "direction" keys to move around, and the "q" key to quit, and the "t" (or "5" or ".") key to target the cursor location.  Note that targetting a location is slightly "dangerous", as the target is maintained even if you are far away.  To cancel an old target, simply hit "*" and then ESCAPE (or "q").  Note that when you cast a spell or throw an object at the target location, the path chosen is the "optimal" path towards that location, which may or may not be the path you want.  Sometimes, by clever choice of a location on the floor for your target, you may be able to convince a thrown object or cast spell to squeeze through a hole or corridor that is blocking direct access to a different grid.  Launching a ball spell or breath weapon at a location in the middle of a group of monsters can often improve the effects of that attack, since ball attacks are not stopped by interposed monsters if the ball is launched at a target.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f8_commands}${\footnote Looking, Message, & Status Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:9}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Looking, Message, & Status Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\b\fs20 Looking Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Full screen map (M)\ulnone 
\par This command will show a map of the entire dungeon, reduced by a factor of nine, on the screen.  Only the major dungeon features will be visible because of the scale, so even some important objects may not show up on the map.  This is particularly useful in locating where the stairs are relative to your current position, or for identifying unexplored areas of the dungeon.
\par 
\par \ul Locate player on map (L) or Where is the player (W)\ulnone 
\par This command lets you scroll your map around, looking at all sectors of the current dungeon level, until you press escape, at which point the map will be re-centered on the player if necessary.  To scroll the map around, simply press any of the "direction" keys.  The top line will display the sector location, and the offset from your current sector.
\par 
\par \ul Look around (l) or Examine things (x)\ulnone 
\par This command is used to look around at nearby monsters (to determine their type and health) and objects (to determine their type).  It is also used to find out what objects (if any) are under monsters, and if a monster is currently inside a wall, and what is under the player.  When you are looking at something, you may hit space for more details, or to advance to the next interesting monster or object, or minus ("-") to go back to the previous monster or object, or a direction key to advance to the nearest interesting monster or object (if any) in that general direction, or "r" to recall information about the current monster race, or "q" or escape to stop looking around.  You always start out looking at "yourself".
\par 
\par \ul Observe an item (I)\ulnone 
\par This command lets you observe a previously *identified* item.  This will tell you things about the special powers of the object.  Currently, it only makes sense for artifacts and ego-items.
\par 
\par 
\par \b Message Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Repeat level feeling (^F)
\par \ulnone Repeats the feeling about the dungeon level that you got when you first entered the level.
\par 
\par \ul View previous messages (^P)\ulnone 
\par This command shows you all the recent messages.  You can scroll through them or exit with ESCAPE.
\par 
\par \ul Take notes (:)\ulnone 
\par This command allows you to take notes, which will then appear in your message list (prefixed with "Note:").
\par 
\par 
\par \b Game Status Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Character Description (C)\ulnone 
\par Brings up a full description of your character, including your skill levels, your current and potential stats, and various other information.  From this screen, you can change your name or use the file character description command to save your character status to a file.  That command saves additional information, including your background, your inventory, and the contents of your house.
\par 
\par \ul Check knowledge (~)\ulnone 
\par This command allows you to ask about the knowledge possessed by your character.  Currently, this includes being able to list all known \i artifacts\i0 , \i uniques\i0 , and \i objects\i0 .  Normally, once an artifact is generated and lost it can never again be found, and will become \i known\i0  to the player.  With preserve mode, an artifact can never be lost until it is known to the player.  In either case, any known artifacts not in the possession of the player will never again be generated.  The \i uniques \i0 are special unique monsters which can only be killed once per game.  Certain objects come in \i flavors\i0 , and you must determine the effect of each flavor once for each such type of object, and this command will allow you to display all known flavors.
\par 
\par \ul Interact with the system (!)\ulnone 
\par Allow the user to interact with the underlying visual system.  This command is currently unused.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote f9_commands}${\footnote Other Commands}+{\footnote f0_command:10}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Other Commands\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\b\fs20 Saving and Exiting Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Save and Quit (Ctrl-X)\ulnone 
\par To save your game so that you can return to it later, use this command.  Save files will also be generated (hopefully) if the game crashes due to a system error.  After you die, you can use your savefile to play again with the same options and such.
\par 
\par \ul Save (Ctrl-S)\ulnone 
\par This command saves the game but doesn't exit Angband.  Use this frequently if you are paranoid about having your computer crash (or your power go out) while you are playing.
\par 
\par \ul Quit (commit suicide) (Q)\ulnone 
\par Kills your character and exits Angband.  You will be prompted to make sure you really want to do this, and then asked to verify that choice.  Note that dead characters are dead forever.
\par 
\par 
\par \b User Pref File Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Interact with options (=)\ulnone 
\par Allow you to interact with options.  Note that using the "cheat" options may mark your savefile as unsuitable for the high score list.  You may change normal options using the "X" and "Y" user pref commands.  The "window" options allow you to specify what should be drawn in any of the special sub-windows (not available on all platforms). See {\uldb Option Descriptions}{\v !JumpID()} for more info.
\par 
\par \ul Interact with macros (@)\ulnone 
\par Allow you to interact with macros.  You may load or save macros from user pref files, create macros of various types, or define keymaps.  You must define a "current action", shown at the bottom of the screen, before you attempt to use any of the "create macro" commands, which use that "current action" as their action.  This is a horrible interface, and will be fixed eventually.
\par 
\par \ul Interact with visuals (%)\ulnone 
\par Allow you to interact with visuals.  You may load or save visuals from user pref files, or modify the attr/char mappings for the monsters, objects, and terrain features.  You must use the "redraw" command (^R) to redraw the map after changing attr/char mappings.
\par 
\par \ul Interact with colors (&)\ulnone 
\par Allow the user to interact with colors.  This command only works on some systems.
\par  
\par 
\par \b Help Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Help (?)\ulnone 
\par Brings up the Angband on-line help system.  Note that the help files are just text files in a particular format, and that other help files may be available on the Net.  In particular, there are a variety of spoiler files which do not come with the standard distribution.  Check the place you got Angband from or ask on the newsgroup {\uldb rec.games.roguelike.angband}{\v !JumpID()} about them.
\par 
\par \ul Identify Symbol (/)\ulnone 
\par Use this command to find out what a character stands for.  For instance, by pressing "/.", you can find out that the "\f1 .\f0 " symbol stands for a floor spot.  When used with a symbol that represents creatures, the this command will tell you only what class of creature the symbol stands for, not give you specific information about a creature you can see.  To get that, use the Look command.
\par 
\par There are three special symbols you can use with the Identify Symbol command to access specific parts of your monster memory. Typing Ctrl-A when asked for a symbol will recall details about all monsters, typing Ctrl-U will recall details about all unique monsters, and typing Ctrl-N will recall details about all non-unique monsters.
\par 
\par If the character stands for a creature, you are asked if you want to recall details.  If you answer yes, information about the creatures you have encountered with that symbol is shown in the Recall window if available, or on the screen if not.  You can also answer "k" to see the list sorted by number of kills, or "p" to see the list sorted by dungeon level the monster is normally found on.  Pressing ESCAPE at any point will exit this command.
\par 
\par \ul Game Version (V)\ulnone 
\par This command will tell you what version of Angband you are using. For more information, see {\uldb Version Information}{\v !JumpID()}.
\par 
\par 
\par \b Extra Commands\b0 
\par 
\par \ul Toggle Choice Window (^E) \ulnone 
\par Toggles the display in any sub-windows (if available) which are displaying your inventory or equipment.
\par 
\par \ul Redraw Screen (^R)\ulnone 
\par This command adapts to various changes in global options, and redraws all of the windows.  It is normally only necessary in abnormal situations, such as after changing the visual attr/char mappings, or enabling "graphics" mode.
\par 
\par \ul Load screen dump (left-paren)\ulnone 
\par This command loads a "snap-shot" of the current screen from the file "dump.txt", and displays it on the screen.
\par 
\par \ul Save screen dump (right-paren)\ulnone 
\par This command dumps a "snap-shot" of the current screen to the file "dump.txt", including encoded color information.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g1_options}${\footnote User Interface Options}+{\footnote g0_option:2}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b User Interface Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Rogue-like commands\ulnone  [rogue_like_commands]
\par Selects the "roguelike" command set (see {\uldb Command Descriptions}{\v !JumpID()} for info).
\par 
\par \ul Activate quick messages [quick_messages]
\par \ulnone Allows the use of any keypress as a response to the "-more-" prompt (useful for monster farming).  Allows most keys to mean "no" to any "[y/n]" prompt.
\par 
\par \ul Prompt for floor item selection [floor_query_flag]
\par \ulnone Allows the user to select objects from the center of stacks.  Without this option, the uppermost appropriate object will always be selected.
\par 
\par \ul Prompt before picking things up\ulnone  [carry_query_flag]
\par Forces the game to ask your permission before allowing you to pick up any object.
\par 
\par \ul Use old target by default\ulnone  [use_old_target]
\par Forces all commands which normally ask for a "direction" to use the current "target" if there is one.  Use of this option can be dangerous if you target locations on the ground, unless you clear them when done.
\par 
\par \ul Pick things up by default\ulnone  [always_pickup]
\par Tells the game that walking onto an item should attempt to pick it up.  Picking up objects in the manner takes no additional energy.  Note the "g" and "-" commands, which can be used to "reverse" this option for a single turn.
\par 
\par \ul Repeat obvious commands\ulnone  [always_repeat]
\par Tells the game that when you attempt to "open" a door or chest, "bash" a door, "tunnel" through walls, "disarm" traps or chests, or "alter" any grid, that you wish to automatically "repeat" the command 99 times (see {\uldb Command Descriptions}{\v !JumpID()}), unless an explicit repeat count was given.
\par 
\par \ul Merge inscriptions when stacking\ulnone  [stack_force_notes]
\par Force otherwise identical objects to merge, even if one has an empty inscription and the other does not.  The resulting stack keeps the non-empty inscription.
\par 
\par \ul Merge discounts when stacking\ulnone  [stack_force_costs]
\par Force otherwise identical objects to merge, even if they have different discounts.  The resulting stack keeps the largest discount.  This option may cause you to lose "value", but will give you optimal pack usage.
\par 
\par \ul Audible bell (on errors, etc)\ulnone  [ring_bell]
\par Attempt to make a "bell" noise when various "errors" occur.
\par 
\par \ul Open/Disarm/Close without direction\ulnone  [easy_open]
\par If there is only one closed door next to the character, the game will not bother asking for a direction when the player asks to "o"pen something.  The same applies for "c"losing doors and "D"isarming traps.
\par 
\par \ul Open/Disarm doors/traps on movement\ulnone  [easy_alter]
\par Moving into a closed door will attempt once to open it, and moving into a trap will attempt once to disarm it. If the player ever wishes to leave a known teleport trap as a guaranteed escape route, this option must therefore be off.
\par 
\par \ul Display floor stacks in a list\ulnone  [easy_floor]
\par When moving into a stack, if this option is *off*, the character will attempt to pick up items from the stack, from top to bottom, until the stack is gone or the inventory is full. This option allows the player to interact with other items than the one at the top of the stack.
\par 
\par \ul Scroll map while targeting\ulnone  [scroll_target]
\par This allows the player to target monsters which are off-screen from the player's point of view, as the view will scroll to show the whereabouts of all monsters in line of sight so the player can target them.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g2_options}${\footnote Disturbance Options}+{\footnote g0_option:3}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Disturbance Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Run past stairs\ulnone  [run_ignore_stairs]
\par Ignore stairs when running.
\par 
\par \ul Run through open doors\ulnone  [run_ignore_doors]
\par Ignore open doors when running.
\par 
\par \ul Run past known corners\ulnone  [run_cut_corners]
\par Cut sharply around "known" corners when running.  This will result in "faster" running, but may cause you to run into a lurking monster.
\par 
\par \ul Run into potential corners\ulnone  [run_use_corners]
\par Fully explore "potential corners" in hallways.
\par 
\par \ul Disturb whenever any monster moves\ulnone  [disturb_move]
\par Disturb the player when any monster moves, appears, or disappears.  This includes monsters which are only visible due to telepathy, so you should probably turn this option off if you want to rest nearsuch monsters.
\par 
\par \ul Disturb whenever viewable monster moves\ulnone  [disturb_near]
\par Disturb the player when any viewable monster moves, whenever any monster becomes viewable for the first time, and also whenever any viewable monster becomes no longer viewable.  This option ignores the existance of "telepathy" for the purpose of determining whether a monster is "viewable".  See also the "view_reduce_view" option.
\par 
\par \ul Disturb whenever map panel changes\ulnone  [disturb_panel]
\par This option causes you to be disturbed by the screen "scrolling", as it does when you get close to the "edge" of the screen.
\par 
\par \ul Disturb whenever player state changes\ulnone  [disturb_state]
\par This option causes you to be disturbed whenever the player state changes, including changes in hunger, resistance, confusion, etc.
\par 
\par \ul Disturb whenever boring things happen\ulnone  [disturb_minor]
\par This option causes you to be disturbed by various bring things, including monsters bashing down doors, inventory feelings, and beginning to run out of fuel.
\par 
\par \ul Verify destruction of objects\ulnone  [verify_destroy]
\par Prompt for verification of the "destroy" command.
\par 
\par \ul Verify use of special commands\ulnone  [verify_special]
\par Prompt for verification of the "special" commands (borg and debug).
\par 
\par \ul Allow quantity specification\ulnone  [allow_quantity]
\par Prompt for a quantity when necessary, instead of defaulting to a single object.
\par 
\par \ul Automatically clear -more- prompts\ulnone  [auto_more]
\par The game does not wait for a keypress when it comes to a -more- prompt, but carries on going.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g3_options}${\footnote Gameplay Options}+{\footnote g0_option:4}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Gameplay Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Auto-scum for good levels\ulnone  [auto_scum]
\par This is a hack but allows you to force the generation of "good" levels in the dungeon.  This option may be extremely slow on some machines, especially deep in the dungeon.  The minimum "goodness" of the level is based on the dungeon level, so the deeper you go, the better the level will be.  A lot of people consider this option to be cheating.
\par 
\par \ul Expand the power of the look command\ulnone  [expand_look]
\par Expand the "look" command to allow the user to "look" at grids which are not actually in view of the player, allowing the examination of objects/monsters which have only been detected by spells, or sensed via telepathy.
\par 
\par \ul Expand the power of the list commands\ulnone  [expand_list]
\par Expand the "listing" commands so that they "wrap" at the "edges" of the appropriate list.  This allows the "look" and "target" commands to "cycle" through all appropriate grids forever, and the "identify symbol" to browse through all of the monsters of a given type.
\par 
\par \ul Map remembers all perma-lit grids\ulnone  [view_perma_grids]
\par Memorize all perma-lit floor grids which are seen by the player.  This option allows you to keep track of which explored floor grids were perma-lit, but does not distinguish between dark floor grids, unexplored floor grids, and unknown grids.  Turning off this option allows the player to always know which lit floor grids are in line of sight, but this is better accomplished by the "view_bright_lite" option.  Note that any non-floor grids which is seen by the player are always memorized, and "object" which is seen by the player is memorized independantly from the memorization of the grid itself.
\par 
\par \ul Map remembers all torch-lit grids\ulnone  [view_torch_grids]
\par Memorize all (torch-lit) floor grids which are seen by the player.  This option not only allows you to keep track of which floor grids have been explored but also which ones are dark, because the use of this option activates a special color scheme for the display of floor grids in which dark grids are drawn in dark gray, lit grids are drawn in white, and (if the "view_bright_lite" option is set) lit grids which are also in line of sight are drawn in orange.  Note that grids which are currently torch-lit are considered to be lit, and are thus drawn in white, unless the "view_yellow_lite" option is set, in which case they are drawn in yellow.
\par 
\par \ul Generate dungeons with aligned rooms\ulnone  [dungeon_align]
\par Force all rooms to be "aligned" with the "panel" divisions.  This results in a much "prettier" dungeon, but may result in fewer greater vaults.
\par 
\par \ul Generate dungeons with connected stairs\ulnone  [dungeon_stair] 
\par Always generate a staircase back to the level you came from, if you used a staircase to get to the level.  This is more "realistic", and safer, but less of a challenge for some people.
\par 
\par \ul Monsters chase current location (v.slow)\ulnone  [flow_by_sound]
\par Allow monsters to make paths to the player when they are nearby.  This option is extremely slow, but can produce viciously smart monsters.
\par 
\par \ul Monsters chase recent locations (v.slow)\ulnone  [flow_by_smell]
\par Allow monsters to take advantage of "old" trails that you may have left in the dungeon.  This has no effect unless "flow_by_sound" is also set.
\par 
\par 
\par \ul Monsters behave more intelligently\ulnone  [smart_monsters]
\par Monsters have a certain amount of intelligence and will use it - teleporting away when low on hit points, using their more powerfulspells in preference to the less powerful spells, etc. Not all monsters are, of course, intelligent.
\par 
\par \ul Monsters act smarter in groups\ulnone  [smart_packs]
\par "Group" monsters will use tactics that groups of monsters might reasonably employ - such as hiding out of sight around a corner, trying to draw the character out into the middle of a room so they can surround him and all attack at once, rather than chasing one by one down a corridor.
\par 
\par \ul Monsters learn from their mistakes\ulnone  [smart_learn]
\par Allow monsters to learn what spell attacks you are resistant to, and to use this information to choose the best attacks.
\par 
\par \ul Monsters exploit players weaknesses\ulnone  [smart_cheat]
\par Allow monsters to know what spell attacks you are resistant to, and to use this information to choose the best attacks.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g4_options}${\footnote Efficiency Options}+{\footnote g0_option:5}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Efficiency Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Reduce lite-radius when running\ulnone  [view_reduce_lite]
\par Reduce the radius of the player's lite to that of a torch when the player is running, which makes running more efficient, but is extremely annoying.
\par 
\par \ul Hide player symbol when running\ulnone  [hidden_player]
\par Hide the player symbol when the player is "running", which makes the game somewhat faster.
\par 
\par \ul Avoid checking for user abort\ulnone  [avoid_abort]
\par Avoid checking to see if the user has pressed a key during resting or running or repeated commands.  This not only makes the game much more efficient (on many systems), but also allows the use of certain obscure macro sequences, such as turning this option on, resting until done, turning this option off, and casting a spell.  Note that the use of this option may be dangerous on certain graphic machines.  Resting for long periods of time with this option set is dangerous since the resting may not stop until the user takes damage from starvation.
\par 
\par \ul Avoid processing special colors\ulnone  [avoid_other]
\par Avoid processing the "multi-hued" or "clear" attributes of monsters.  This will cause all multi-hued monsters to appear violet and all clear monsters to appear white, and will cause trappers and lurkers to be visible on some machines, but it may greatly increase efficiency especially when telepathy is active.  Certain systems may choose to set this option if they are unable to support the special color processing, but if they handle graphics correctly, by using attr/char pairs with the high bits set, then not only will the game correctly avoid using any "dangerous" color processing, but it will allow such processing to occur when it is not dangerous.  So if you are using graphics, and you use a normal attr/char for the floor grids, then you can use the special lighting effects for floors.
\par 
\par \ul Flush input on various failures\ulnone  [flush_failure]
\par This option forces the game to flush all pending input whenever various failures occur, such as failure to cast a spell, failure to use a wand, etc.  This is very useful if you use macros which include directional components with commands that can fail, since it will prevent you from walking towards monsters when your spells fail.
\par 
\par \ul Flush input whenever disturbed\ulnone  [flush_disturb]
\par This option forces the game to flush all pending input whenever the character is "disturbed".  This is useful if you use macros which take time, since it will prevent you from continuing your macro while being attacked by a monster.
\par 
\par \ul Flush output before every command\ulnone  [fresh_before]
\par This option forces the game to flush all output before every command.  This will give you maximal information, but may slow down the game somewhat.  Note that this option is only useful when using macros, resting, running, or repeating commands, since the output is always flushed when the game is waiting for a keypress from the user.
\par 
\par \ul Flush output after certain things\ulnone  [fresh_after]
\par This option forces the game to flush all output after not only every player command, but also after every round of processing monsters and objects, and after every message, which will maximize your information, but may slow down the game a lot, especially on slower machines, and on faster machines you cannot see the results anyway.
\par 
\par \ul Compress messages in savefiles\ulnone  [compress_savefile]
\par Compress the savefile, by only saving the most recent messages that the player has received.  This can cut the size of the savefile by a drastic amount, but will result in the loss of message information.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g5_options}${\footnote Display Options}+{\footnote g0_option:6}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Display Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Show dungeon level in feet\ulnone  [depth_in_feet]
\par Display dungeon depths in feet instead of levels.
\par 
\par \ul Show labels in equipment listings\ulnone  [show_labels]
\par Display "labels" (what an object is being used for) for objects in all equipment listings.
\par 
\par \ul Show weights in all object listings\ulnone  [show_weights]
\par Display weights (in pounds) of objects in all inventory, equipment, store items, and home items listings.
\par 
\par \ul Show choices in inven/equip listings\ulnone  [show_choices]
\par Display "choices" (legal responses) in any sub-windows which are being used to display your inventory or equipment.  Also, if one sub-window is being used to display your inventory or equipment, then this option will cause it to be (temporarily) toggled as needed to always show the "appropriate" set of objects (inventory or equipment).
\par 
\par \ul Show details in monster descriptions\ulnone  [show_details]
\par Display "details" (including number of monsters killed and textual descriptions) in monster descriptions.
\par 
\par \ul Show flavors in object descriptions\ulnone  [show_flavors]
\par Display "flavors" (color or variety) in object descriptions, even for objects whose type is known.  This does not affect objects in stores.
\par 
\par \ul Hilite the player with the cursor\ulnone  [hilite_player]
\par Place the visible cursor on the player.  This looks fine on some Unix machines, but horrible on most graphics machines.  Note that only some machines are able to *not* show the cursor, but on those machines, hiding the cursor often speeds up the game and looks better.
\par 
\par \ul Use special colors for torch-lit grids\ulnone  [view_yellow_lite]
\par This option causes special colors to be used for "torch-lit" grids in certain situations (see "view_granite_lite" and "view_special_lite").  Turning this option off will slightly improve game speed.
\par 
\par \ul Use special colors for viewable grids\ulnone  [view_bright_lite]
\par This option causes special colors to be used for nonviewable grids in certain situations (see "view_granite_lite" and "view_special_lite").  When this option is set, floor grids which are normally drawn in white but which are not currently viewable by the player are instead drawn in dark gray.  This makes the "viewable" grids appear "brighter" than the others, allowing the player to easily determine which floor grids are in "line of sight".  Turning this option off will probably increase the speed of the game.
\par 
\par \ul Use special colors for wall grids (slow)\ulnone  [view_granite_lite]
\par This option activates a special color scheme for all wall grids which are normally drawn in white (as walls and rubble normally are).  When the player is blind, we use dark gray, else if the grid is torch-lit, we use yellow (or white) depending on the "view_yellow_lite" option, else if the "view_bright_lite" option is set, and the grid is not in line of sight, or the grid is dark, or the grid is only "partially" lit, then we use gray, otherwise we use the normal white.  Turning this option off will probably increase the speed of the game.  This option may notwork well if the attr/char codes for walls/veins have been changed, or if "graphics" are being used.
\par 
\par \ul Use special colors for floor grids (slow)\ulnone  [view_special_lite]
\par This option activates a special color scheme for all floor grids which are normally drawn in white (as they normally are).  When the player is blind, we use dark gray, else if the grid is torch-lit, we use yellow (or white) depending on the "view_yellow_lite" option, else if the grid is dark, we use dark gray, else if the "view_bright_lite" option is set, and the grid is not in line of sight, we use gray, otherwise we use the normal white.  Turning this option off will probably increase the speed of the game.  This option may not work well if the attr/char codes for walls/veins have been changed, or if graphics are being used.
\par 
\par \ul Center map continuously (very slow)\ulnone  [center_player]
\par The map always centres on the player with this option on. With it off, it is divided into 25 sections, with coordinates (0,0) to (4,4), and will show one section at a time.
\par 
\par \ul Avoid centering while running\ulnone  [run_avoid_center]
\par The map does not centre on the player if the player moves with the "run" command, only when the running finishes.
\par 
\par \ul Show stacks using special attr/character\ulnone  [show_piles]
\par Stacks of items on the floor are shown using the "&" symbol.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g6_options}${\footnote Birth Options}+{\footnote g0_option:7}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Birth Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Allow purchase of stats using points\ulnone  [birth_point_based]
\par This allows the player to set, point by point, his own preferred stats the character, rather than rolling at random, when creating a character.
\par 
\par \ul Allow specification of minimum stats\ulnone  [birth_auto_roller]
\par This allows the player to set minimum stats (within reason) and ask the game to keep on rolling until a character with the desired stats is generated. It is generally believed that a single stat can be got higher with point-based generation, but the overall total of all the will be higher when rolling randomly (including with the auto-roller.)
\par 
\par \ul Maximize effect of race/class bonuses\ulnone  [birth_maximize]
\par Normally, if a character should find potions that permanently increase his stats, the maximum that can be achieved without equipment bonuses is 18/100. If maximize mode is on (which is the default), then the race and class bonuses and penalties apply to this limit, so your half-troll will have a greater maximum possible strength (unassisted by his equipment) than a hobbit. With maximize mode off, all characters max out at 18/100 for all stats. This also affects the start of the game, because race and class bonuses are applied as if they were "rings" in maximize mode (at an exact rate of 0/10 percentile points equals 1 point for stats over 18), and as "potions" in non-maximize mode (drinking sixpotions of [stat] will probably increase your stat by more than 0/60 if it was at 18 to start with.) To cut a long story short and a confusing explanation simple, you get better starting stats in non-maximize mode, but can't get as good at what you're supposed to be best at in the later stages of the game.
\par 
\par \ul Preserve artifacts on leaving level\ulnone  [birth_preserve]
\par If preserve mode is "off", you can get a level feeling that you *NEVER* get with preserve mode "on": a "special" feeling. This means that there is an artifact, a pit or a vault on the level: and while a pit or vault may not necessarily cause a special feeling, an artifact CERTAINLY will.  This is principally of use in finding out which levels are *not* "special", i.e. which ones can be left in a hurry without worrying about leaving something behind - if it's not "special", there is no artifact unless a monster has dropped one when you killed it. This is particularly important because, with preserve mode off, no artifact can be generated more than once in the game. If it's on a level and you miss it, it's gone forever. With preserve mode "on", if you miss an artifact, it can turn up later provided you didn't pick it up and identify it the first time (in which case there is no excuse for losing it.) But you don't get the "special" feeling. (Chances are that a vault will provide a good level feeling anyway, and quite possibly a couple of good items which may or may not include an artifact.)
\par 
\par \ul Restrict the use of stairs/recall\ulnone  [birth_ironman]
\par This option, not recommended for non-advanced players, prevents the generation of up staircases, and makes the scroll and effect of Word of Recall not function: and teleport-level always goes down, as does the spell of stair-creation, except on the quest levels of Sauron and Morgoth.
\par 
\par \ul Restrict the use of stores/home\ulnone  [birth_no_stores]
\par The stores are all closed. The home is someone else's, and locked. You can keep nothing but what you carry with you, and get nothing but what you find in the dungeon. No selling items, or buying potions of restore stat... Not recommended for new players, or indeed for sane players.
\par 
\par \ul Restrict the creation of artifacts\ulnone  [birth_no_artifacts]
\par No artifacts will be created. Ever. Just *how* masochistic are you?
\par 
\par \ul Randomize some of the artifacts\ulnone  [birth_rand_artifacts]
\par A different set of artifacts will be created, in place of the standard ones. This is intended primarily for people who have played enough to know what most of the standard artifacts do and have got bored with them.  Note that savefiles with random artifacts are not guaranteed to be compatible between different Angband versions!
\par 
\par \ul Don't stack objects on the floor\ulnone  [birth_no_stacking]
\par Items dropped on the floor will spread out instead of stacking.  Normal items will disappear if there is no empty grid within a radius of three squares.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g7_options}${\footnote Cheating Options}+{\footnote g0_option:8}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Cheating Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\ul\fs20 Peek into object creation\ulnone  [cheat_peek]
\par Cheaters never win.  But they can peek at object creation.
\par 
\par \ul Peek into monster creation\ulnone  [cheat_hear]
\par Cheaters never win.  But they can peek at monster creation.
\par 
\par \ul Peek into dungeon creation\ulnone  [cheat_room]
\par Cheaters never win.  But they can peek at room creation.
\par 
\par \ul Peek into something else\ulnone  [cheat_xtra]
\par Cheaters never win.  But they can see debugging messages.
\par 
\par \ul Know complete monster info\ulnone  [cheat_know]
\par Cheaters never win.  But they can know all about monsters.
\par 
\par \ul Allow player to avoid death\ulnone  [cheat_live]
\par Cheaters never win.  But they can cheat death.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g8_options}${\footnote Window Flags}+{\footnote g0_option:9}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Window Flags\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 Some platforms support \i sub-windows\i0 , which are windows which can be used to display useful information generally available through other means.  The best thing about these windows is that they are updated automatically (usually) to reflect the current state of the world.  The window options can be used to specify what should be displayed in each window.  The possible choices should be pretty obvious.
\par 
\par \ul Display inven/equip\ulnone 
\par Display the player inventory (and sometimes the equipment).
\par 
\par \ul Display equip/inven\ulnone 
\par Display the player equipment (and sometimes the inventory).
\par 
\par \ul Display player flags\ulnone 
\par Display a special description of the character, including some of the flags which pertain to a character, broken down by equipment item.
\par 
\par \ul Display player screen\ulnone 
\par Display a brief description of the character, including a breakdown of the current player skills (including attacks/shots per round).
\par 
\par \ul Display player flags\ulnone 
\par Display a brief description of the character, including a breakdown of the contributions of each equipment item to various resistances and stats.
\par 
\par \ul Display messages\ulnone 
\par Display the most recently generated messages.
\par 
\par \ul Display overhead view\ulnone 
\par Display an overhead view of the entire dungeon.  This is very slow and does not even look very good.
\par 
\par \ul Display monster recall\ulnone 
\par Display a description of the most monster which has been most recently attacked, targetted, or examined in some way.
\par 
\par \ul Display object recall\ulnone 
\par Display a description of the most recently selected object.  Currently this only affects spellbooks and prayerbooks.  This window flag may be usefully combined with others, such as monster recall.
\par 
\par \ul Display snap-shot\ulnone 
\par This window flag is currently unused.
\par 
\par \ul Display borg messages\ulnone 
\par This window flag is currently used only by the Borg.
\par 
\par \ul Display borg status\ulnone 
\par This window flag is currently used only by the Borg.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \page #{\footnote g9_options}${\footnote Other Options}+{\footnote g0_option:10}\pard\keepn\f0\fs36\b Other Options\fs20\b0\par\pard\par \lang1033\fs20 The "hitpoint_warn" value, if non-zero, is the percentage of maximal hitpoints at which the player is warned that he may die.  It is also used as the cut-off for using the color red to display both hitpoints and mana.
\par 
\par The "delay_factor" value, if non-zero, will slow down the visual effects used for missile, bolt, beam, and ball attacks.  The actual time delay is equal to delay_factor squared in milliseconds.
\par 
\par \lang1031\fs17 
\par \pard\fs17 
\par }

