Attacking and Weapons
 
Attacking monsters in melee is simple: if you move into a creature, you 
attack it, provided you have something to attack with. Usually 
"something to attack with" means a wielded melee weapon, but this is 
not an absolute requirement: a few classes can use martial arts to 
attack with their bare hands; Shield-speciality Weaponmasters can bash 
with their shields; and Werewolves, Beornings and many Monster-mode 
races often rely on innate attacks like claws or teeth.

Ranged combat (shooting) requires you to equip a sling, bow, or 
crossbow, and to have appropriate projectiles you can fire with the f 
command (t in the roguelike keyset). Ideally, you would like to have a 
quiver you can wield and keep your projectiles in, but this is not a 
requirement; it is merely a convenience that saves valuable inventory 
slots. The v command can be used to throw items at monsters, but this 
is rarely very effective, except in special cases like Ninjas (or 
Ninja-Lawyers) throwing Iron Spikes.

Finally, you can use magic to hurt monsters: all characters except 
Berserkers can attack with magical devices, and spellcasters may also 
have access to offensive spells.

Many characters are versatile enough to use most or all of these 
attacking methods to good effect. In such cases melee is usually the 
form of attack that deals the most damage per turn; but as it only 
works against adjacent monsters, you will likely suffer plenty of hits 
in return, so melee also causes you to suffer the most damage per turn. 
Whether this is a good trade-off is for you to determine!

Often you will use all of these attacking methods side-by-side, rather 
than relying on just one. Bows and melee weapons do not compete for the 
same equipment slots, so you can have both equipped at the same time.

Attacking from a Distance

Non-melee attacks always need to be aimed. Whether you are attacking 
with a shooter, a magic device, a spell, or by throwing items, you must 
select a target for your attack. This can be done by either firing into 
one of the eight compass directions, or by using * to select a more 
specific target.

For example, if you want to fire (f/t) the second ammo (b) from your 
quiver, you could type fb9 to fire northeast; or fb* to target a 
specific monster or square followed by 5 when you are happy with your 
selected target. See [a] for more details on the * targetting command.

Often, after one attack of this type, you can speed things up by using 
the n command (X in the roguelike keyset) to attack the same monster in 
the same way again. Note, though, that this may sometimes produce 
unexpected results; for example, if you ran out of your original ammo, 
a new ammo would move into the b quiver slot and you would start using 
it instead. Also, n only tracks a moving target if you targeted a 
monster; if your target was a compass direction or a square, n will 
keep firing in that direction even if monsters move away from there.

Melee Weapons

Carrying a weapon in your backpack does you no good; you must wield a 
weapon with the w command before it can be used in a fight. Most 
characters begin the game with a starting weapon already equipped.

Melee weapons have three main combat characteristics: their damage 
dice, their accuracy bonus (to-hit) and their damage bonus (to-dam). A 
long sword might be displayed as a Long Sword (2d6) (+3,+4); here 2d6 
are the damage dice (throw two six-sided dice, giving between 2 and 12 
damage per hit), +3 is the accuracy bonus (improving your chance to 
successfully hit monsters) and +4 is the damage bonus (which will be 
added to the 2d6 roll). For newly discovered objects, these numbers 
will only become visible once you have identified the weapon. (See [b] 
for an explanation of what other numbers might appear on your weapon.)

The weapon with the highest dice and damage bonus will not necessarily 
be the weapon you do the most damage with; heavy weapons often have 
higher dice, but your strength and dexterity might allow more blows per 
round with a lighter weapon. To review your average damage (and 
accuracy) with your current weapon, type either Cm (Character Sheet, 
melee section) or ~W (Knowledge Menu, Weapon section); the two display 
the same information, so just use the one you find more comfortable.

Ranged Weapons

Slings, bows and crossbows differ from melee weapons in that they have 
damage multipliers instead of damage dice. A short bow, for instance, 
might be displayed as a Short Bow (x2.50) (+4,+7) where the x2.50 is 
the multiplier, and the (+4,+7) are bonuses to accuracy and damage.

The full damage calculation for a shot starts with the damage dice of 
the projectile (which might be an Arrow (3d4) (+2,+5)), then applies 
the damage bonus from the projectile, then slays and brands (see [c] 
below), then boosts from lucky critical hits, then the multiplier, and 
finally damage bonuses from the launcher and possibly other sources. 
Because slays, critical hits and the multiplier are all applied fairly 
late in the process, after the damage bonus from the projectile, the 
total damage from a single hit can be high.

The various ranged weapons each have their own strengths and 
weaknesses; some have higher multipliers, but give fewer shots per 
turn. Note that the shots per turn in the table below are relative and 
should not be taken literally, as your shooting speed depends on not 
just the weapon but also your Archery skill.

                 Shots per turn    Multiplier    Ammunition
Sling                 1.40             2         Pebbles, Iron Shots
Short Bow             1.12             2.50      Arrows
Long Bow              1.00             3         Arrows
Light Crossbow        0.83             3.50      Bolts
Heavy Crossbow        0.75             4         Bolts

The maximum range of a shot depends on the multiplier, and thus tends 
to be higher for bows and crossbows than for slings.

To review your average damage (and accuracy, range, shooting speed 
etc.) with your current shooter and ammo, type either Cs (Character 
Sheet, shooting section) or ~S (Knowledge Menu, Shooter section); the 
two display the same information.

Ego Weapons and Artifacts

The best weapons in the game are imbued with mighty magical powers, and 
fall into two broad categories: (1) artifacts and (2) ego items. These 
categories are explained in more detail elsewhere ([d] and [e]); the 
main difference between them is that an artifact can only be found once 
in each game, while an ego item shares its type with unlimitedly many 
other items.

Both artifacts and ego items can be highly valuable, and may provide 
exceptional damage against certain monsters, boosts to your stats or 
speed, elemental resistances, and other nice stuff. Typically, once 
you've got past the very early game, the weapon you wield will always 
be either an artifact or an ego item.

A list of all artifacts and ego types, and all the bonuses they give, 
would be both a spoiler and excessively long; so play the game and find 
out what there is :)

Slays and Brands

Slays and brands are weapon attributes that give you extra damage 
against certain monsters. A slay increases your damage against a 
particular class of monsters (such as orcs, demons, or undead), while a 
brand is elemental and gives extra damage against all monsters not 
resistant to that element. Slays and brands are functionally one and 
the same thing, the only difference between them is terminology.

Melee weapons frequently have a slay or a brand, and may receive 
additional off-weapon slays (or brands) from sources such as Gloves of 
Slaying. Melee slays work by multiplying the damage dice roll of the 
weapon; for example, Viper's Fang (poison brand) multiplies the dice 
roll by 2.4 if the monster attacked does not resist poison. 
Accordingly, slays and brands are much more valuable on weapons with 
high damage dice (like a 4d10 Heavy Lance) than on a tiny but otherwise 
competitive 1d5 dagger. The multipliers differ from slay to slay, and 
range from as low as x1.9 for Slay Evil (which is still one of the best 
slays due to its broad applicability!) to a mighty x4.5 for some 
mega-slays like Kill Demon.

Archery slays and brands work in a slightly different way: they 
multiply both the damage dice of the projectile and the damage bonus of 
the projectile. Archery slays use lower multipliers than melee slays, 
but this is more than made up for by their application to the 
projectile's damage bonus. Off-weapon archery slays and brands are 
practically unheard of, and even the bows themselves only rarely have 
slays; most commonly, archery slays come directly from the projectiles.

Slays (and brands) never stack; if multiple slays are available that 
would apply to the same monster, only the strongest slay is actually 
applied. There are two main exceptions to this: one is Mark of Chaos, 
which is essentially a random slay or brand re-rolled for each attack. 
If the random brand coincides with an existing brand, it can make the 
brand slightly stronger. The other is Force Brand (or Mana Brand), a 
very strong brand that consumes your mana; it fully combines with other 
slays and brands, but only works as long as you have mana.

A few classes, such as Samurai and Sword-speciality Weaponmasters, have 
access to special brands available only to them. These may be very 
strong (the special Samurai version of the lightning brand has a higher 
multiplier than any normal brand or slay), and sometimes combine with 
normal brands: also having a regular Lightning Brand makes the Samurai 
brand stronger still.

Off-weapon slays and brands are never applied to innate attacks or 
unarmed combat, except for six specific brands (Acid, Electricity, 
Fire, Cold, Poison and Mana) which are special-cased for martial arts.

Choosing the Right Weapon

In the early game, before you find your first decent ego weapon, you 
probably just want to pick the weapon you do the most damage with. (As 
noted above, you can type either Cm or ~W to check your damage output 
per round.) Things get more complicated once you start discovering good 
ego weapons or artifacts; one weapon might do more damage, but another 
has bonuses or resistances you'd like. You will need to compromise: 
make sure you get the resistances you need, but also that you still do 
enough damage! (A common dilemma faced by new players is that they find 
the artifact sword 'Sting', but aren't sure whether to equip it since 
their previous weapon did slightly more damage per round. The general 
solution to this dilemma is that Sting wins and you ought to switch.)

In comparing weapon damage, pay attention to not just the raw damage 
number but also to your hit chance against monsters: high theoretical 
damage is no good if in practice you always miss! Note, though, that 
poor accuracy with a new weapon might be just due to your lack of 
experience with that weapon: your proficiency is low, and your accuracy 
will improve as you gain proficiency. See [f] for more details on how 
weapon proficiency works.

Remember also your speed: damage per round is a good general yardstick, 
but a bonus to speed means you get more rounds.

Attacking Monsters in Walls

Some creatures, like ghosts, have the ability to pass through walls. 
You can attack monsters in adjacent walls in melee by trying to move 
into the wall space containing the monster; if the creature is 
invisible to you, this requires you to tunnel (+) into the wall.

Bolt spells (and projectiles) do full damage to monsters in walls, but 
ball spells will be stopped and blow up just in front of the wall, 
dealing only half damage. (Conversely, if you manage to assume a 
ghostly form, you will also take reduced damage from ball and breath 
attacks while inside a wall.)

Attacking Pets or Friendly Monsters

As long as your character has a clear head, the game usually assumes 
that you don't really want to attack somebody who is on your side. 
Attempted melee will either have no effect or just results in you and 
the monster swapping positions, and the targetting menu skips pets.

Sometimes, though, you might actually want to hurt a pet or a friendly 
monster. (The classic case is killing Farmer Maggot for the sake of a 
cheap item...) To accomplish this, use the + "alter adjacent grid" 
command to melee; in the targetting menu, p allows you to choose any 
square or monster as your target.

Note that attacking a friendly monster will turn it hostile.

Martial Arts

Monks, Mystics and Force-Trainers prefer to fight unarmed; they can 
only use a handful of weapons well, and even then are generally more 
effective barehanded. As these classes gain experience, they learn new 
and more powerful attacking techniques; high-level attacks may even 
stun or slow opponents.

Martial arts characters can view their attack list and average damage 
per round in the usual ways: by typing Cm or ~W.

Two-Handed Wielding

Most characters wield a weapon in one hand and a shield in the other; 
but from a damage point of view, your best option is nearly always to 
do away with the shield and leave both hands for the weapon. Wielding a 
single weapon with both hands improves your damage and accuracy; and 
unless your blows per round were already maxed out anyway, you also 
receive more blows.

The downside is that you effectively have one fewer equipment slot: you 
miss out on the AC, stat bonuses, resistances and other nice stuff that 
a shield (or a second weapon) in that slot would have given. Whether 
this is a good trade depends on your character; but a fairly typical 
approach is to wield a weapon two-handedly until you find a good ego 
shield, and then stop.

Many light weapons (specifically, those that weigh less than 10 pounds 
and are not polearms) cannot be wielded two-handed, and should always 
be used together with either a shield or a second weapon. On the other 
hand, very heavy weapons (compared to your strength) can only be 
wielded properly with two hands.

Dual-Wielding

Wielding one weapon in your right hand, and another in your left hand, 
is called dual-wielding. Unlike two-handed wielding, which almost every 
character can do, dual-wielding works best on specific classes: those 
with a high dual-wielding proficiency cap (see [g] for more details on 
dual-wielding proficiency). Dual-wielding also differs radically from 
two-handed wielding in that two-handed wielding works best with heavy 
weapons, while dual-wielding works best with very light weapons.

The two classes best suited for dual-wielding are Ninjas and 
Berserkers; not only can both reach Master proficiency (the highest 
possible), but it also fits their skillset in other ways. The usual 
damage penalty from dual-wielding without special Genji gloves is 
waived for Berserkers, while Ninjas have a strong preference for light 
weapons and cannot equip a shield without incurring penalties. It is 
possible for dual-wielding to work well on other melee classes as well, 
but you should always check your proficiency cap.

There is one somewhat surprising class that might like to dual-wield 
despite an extremely low proficiency limit: sorcerers. Being the 
ultimate mage class, sorcerers never really melee... so they don't need 
AC or melee accuracy much, and weapons often give better bonuses than a 
shield would.

Magical Aids to Physical Combat

There are several ways to increase your physical combat ability through 
magic. The most common are Potions of Heroism and Potions of Berserk 
Strength, which temporarily increase your accuracy and HP pool and 
provide resistance to fear. Scrolls of Blessing, Holy Chant and Holy 
Prayer can also be used to temporarily improve your AC and accuracy; 
these bonuses are cumulative with the potions.

Some characters (such as Troika Disciples, Craft realm users, and many 
Weaponmasters) can place temporary slays or brands on their weapons.

Improving Your Odds

Using magic to get better at combat is nice; but using magic to make 
your opponents less dangerous tends to be even more effective. In 
practice this means using spells or magic devices to confuse or slow an 
enemy.

Confusion in particular is an incredibly powerful tool. A Wand of 
Confuse Monster, a Staff of Confuse Monsters or even splash damage from 
a thrown Potion of Booze can send monsters stumbling into random 
directions, unable to use their spells or breath attacks as they could 
not aim them reliably. Confused monsters can only hurt you in melee, 
and then only if they happen to find the right direction. Not all 
monsters can be confused, but many can, including quite a few uniques.

Slowness is a bit less dramatic, but still very valuable. In the early 
game, -10 to speed tends to mean a monster's speed is reduced by half 
or more, which needless to say is an enormous advantage; for faster 
monsters the effects will be less dramatic, but you will still get a 
turn in more often and be at much less danger of a deadly double-move. 
All uniques are immune to slowness, but most non-uniques can be slowed.

Basic Tactics

Pillardancing

Not recommended since monsters move at irregular speeds. Monsters will 
also "splash" you with area-of-effect spells, curses, or summoning, so 
this tactic is probably the last thing you want to try. It is mentioned 
here because it is a popular tactic in vanilla Angband.

Shoot'n Scoot

Requires a large room, Phase Door, and some type of ranged weapon. 
Stand at one end of the room, your enemy at the other. Fire at him 
until he gets close, blink away with Phase Door, and repeat until the 
monster is dead. If you are much faster than the monster, or the 
monster is confused, using Phase Door may not be necessary; you can 
just back away if the monster comes uncomfortably close.

Wail'n Bail

Requires Teleport items. Fight the monster until you're almost dead, 
teleport out (or teleport him out), find him, and resume fighting. 
Watch out - your teleport might land you right next to some unfriendly 
fellow who'll kill you dead. Also, this tactic relies on your ability 
to recover from damage faster than the monster does; usually this will 
be the case, but you cannot always rely on it.

Anti-Summoning Corridor

Requires a little time to set up, but can be done just about anywhere 
with non-permanent walls. Dig a twisting corridor into the rock and 
station yourself at the far end. Most monsters that summon are smart 
about this tactic, and will refuse to approach closely if they detect 
you using it; but if you are quick enough, you can rush them and still 
fight in semi-contained quarters. This tactic can also be useful 
against large groups of non-summoners, for example dragons.

Line-of-Sight Cheese

Requires a ranged attack. You exploit the local terrain to your 
advantage by shooting enemies when you are not in their line of sight 
and they, therefore, cannot shoot back. Like pillardancing, this tactic 
is much less useful here than in Angband; the usual result is that the 
monster gets pissed off and buries you in double the summons. However, 
it does still work well against some specific monsters like hand drujs.


Original   : (??) Chris Weisiger and Leon Marrick
Updated    : (??)
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Updated    : Hengband 1.5.2
Updated    : PosChengband 1.0.0
Updated    : PosChengband 4.0.0
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.liquorice


