Targetting

The targetting prompt offers many options, and two different modes: 
monster-targetting mode and free-targetting mode. If there are hostile 
monsters in line of sight, targetting begins in monster-targetting 
mode; the first target offered will be the nearest such monster, with 
other hostile monsters in line of sight as alternative targets. Use 
direction keys to cycle between monsters; + and - also work, but are 
less intuitive. Turn on the target_pet option ([a]) if you want this 
mode to allow non-hostile monsters as targets.

If you wish to target (or inspect) a square with no monster on it, 
press p or o, switching to free-targetting mode where direction keys 
simply move the cursor. (This mode is automatically entered if no 
hostile monsters are in line of sight.) o and p are identical except in 
one respect: pressing p (which stands for player) moves the cursor to 
your own location, while pressing o (which stands for offset) does not. 

At any time, press 5, t or . to accept the current target (and exit 
targetting mode), q or ESC to exit targetting mode without selecting a 
target, r to recall lore about a monster on the target square, x to see 
all items on the target square (including stolen or picked-up items 
carried by monsters, but excluding normal monster item drops), and ( to 
select a square as a travel target. In the original keyset, J and j 
also work as travel keys and are equivalent with (.

Users of the roguelike keyset have a bonus option in free-targetting 
mode: they can press Shift+DIR to move the cursor many squares at a 
time.

Precision Targetting

When you cast a spell or fire a missile at a target location, the path 
chosen is the direct path towards that location, which may or may not 
be the path you want. Sometimes, by clever choice of a side location as 
your target, you may be able to aim at squares not directly in line of 
sight:
  
  Position: an unknown grid [q,t,p,m,x,j,+,-,?,<dir>]                           
        ##........#.... #%%####
        #........\......      #
        %.......}{\@....      #
      %#%..........*....      #
     ##    ........*...   ... #
     #       ......*...   .d. #
     #        ..(.#*.     .#####
     #          .##*       T   #
     #    ^   #####*           ##########                                       
     ##       #   #*           '
     #        #  ##*         ############                                       
     #        #  #*        ###
     #        # ##*       ##                                                    
     ##       # # *        #                                                    
      #       # ##*        #                                                    
      #########  #*#########
  
Notice that bright-red *? There's a dragon on that square I cannot 
target directly; but I managed to include that square in my spell's 
path by using p to target a location on the southern edge of the map.

Note that bolt spells always stop at the first monster in the spell's 
path, but beam and breath spells affect all squares in their paths, and 
ball spells can reach the target square by flying over monsters' heads 
if necessary.

Location Targets vs Monster Targets

When selecting a target, you may target either a monster or a location. 
This is an important difference: if you target a monster, the target 
will move when the monster moves; but if you target a location, the 
target remains stationary, even if the location had a monster in it. 

If you bypass targetting mode you can also target a compass direction, 
which for this purpose is always equivalent to targetting a location, 
even if there was an obvious monster in the direction indicated. So 
watch out if there's a monster due west of you, you fire west and then 
spam n (or X in the roguelike keyset) to repeat: this will work 
beautifully as long as the monster remains due west, but as soon as it 
moves north or south you will need to retarget, something you would not 
have needed to do had you selected the monster as your target.

Quick Summary

  5 t .        Select new target and exit targetting mode
  ESC q        Exit targetting mode with no target selected    
  DIR          Move to square or monster in direction indicated
  +            Move to more distant monster
  -            Move to less distant monster
  ( j J        Select travel target (exit and travel if not aiming)

  m            Enter monster-targetting mode
  p            Enter free-targetting mode (move cursor to player)
  o            Enter free-targetting mode (keep cursor location)

  r            Recall monster lore     
  x            Cycle between items on target square

  ?            Display this help topic

