Disciples

Trusted followers of mysterious ancient spirits known as the 'Purples', 
the Disciples roam the world running errands for their masters, 
learning mighty spells and receiving rare items as rewards for their 
work. There are three main flavors of Purple Disciples - disciples of 
Karrot, disciples of Yeqrezh, and disciples of a group of Purples known 
as the Troika. Each of the Purples expects different things of their 
Disciples, and each helps them achieve their ends in very different 
ways.

Karrot
Karrot is a proud and ambitious Purple, convinced that it is his 
destiny to one day rule the universe; but rather than getting 
personally involved, he has assigned to his Disciples the task of 
eliminating any potential rivals (like the Serpent of Chaos). Being so 
sure of his greatness, Karrot sees little reason to vary his habits and 
is the only one of the Purples to predictably teach all of his 
Disciples the same spells. Karrot occasionally assigns side-quests to 
his Disciples, with the dual aim of testing their mettle and removing 
lesser threats to his supremacy. These side-quests only appear on 
fairly challenging levels; they can be avoided by sticking to safer 
areas, but this will not make Karrot happy...

Karrot considers many artifacts to be his rightful personal property, 
and will claim them immediately if you should find them. He will, 
however, give you another artifact as a reward for your discovery. 
These replacement artifacts tend to start out as fairly weak, but 
eventually become very strong as you gain Karrot's respect by leveling 
up and by successfully completing side-quests. If you're really lucky 
and do a particularly good job, you might even receive the ultimate 
gift - Urog, Karrot's legendary blade of shadows!

Disciples of Karrot tend to play as fighter-mages, relying on melee, 
spells and devices alike. They are unique among Disciples in not having 
a mana pool; casting a spell takes a toll on their hit points instead. 
They are also the only Disciples to have a charming spell - but the 
greatest of Karrot's followers are rumoured to eventually learn even 
rarer abilities...
Karrot's disciples depend on Intelligence to make their spells work.

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      -1        Disarming   Poor         
  Intelligence  +1        Device      Good         
  Wisdom        -1        Save        Fair         
  Dexterity     +0        Stealth     Fair         
  Constitution  -1        Searching   Fair         
  Charisma      +1        Perception  Poor         
  Life Rating   95%       Melee       Fair         
  Base HP       14        Bows        Fair         
  Experience   125%
  
Yeqrezh
Yeqrezh is the friendliest of the Purples, supportive of his Disciples 
and willing to let them find their own way. Disciples of Yeqrezh will 
learn 20 spells over the course of the game - one every two character 
levels, apart from levels 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50; seventeen of these 
spells are offered by Yeqrezh, while the other three (at levels 16, 32 
and 48) are chosen by you. Every ten levels, Yeqrezh offers direct help 
to his Disciples; depending on your choice, he can give you rare items 
or a permanent mental or physical ability, or share some of his life 
experience with you. Some of these abilities can be improved 
repeatedly, allowing you to accumulate exceptional mastery.

Disciples of Yeqrezh gain many practical tools as well as solid 
offensive options, and a useful item as a gift from their patron every 
odd-numbered character level. They are the most mage-like of all 
Disciples, and lack of hit points is their only true weakness. 
Nevertheless, they are extremely versatile, and can also win through 
melee, archery or even sneaking about silently collecting loot.

Yeqrezh is the recommended patron for new (or highly cautious) players, 
as he is the only Purple not to actively incentivize a demanding, 
push-the-envelope approach. Yeqrezh's disciples, like Karrot's, rely on 
Intelligence to power their spells.

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      +0        Disarming   Poor         
  Intelligence  +1        Device      Fair         
  Wisdom        +1        Save        Poor         
  Dexterity     +0        Stealth     Fair         
  Constitution  -3        Searching   Poor         
  Charisma      +0        Perception  Poor         
  Life Rating   90%       Melee       Good         
  Base HP       12        Bows        Good         
  Experience   115%
  
Troika
The Troika is a group of three closely related Purples working together 
- Guntujant, Uxip and Sohoglyth. Guntujant is a capricious Purple who 
follows the careers of his servants very closely, and rewards and 
punishes them seemingly at random; the powers gained by his followers 
are unpredictable, but generally quite strong. Uxip delights in combat, 
and grants Troika disciples their prodigious endurance and skill with 
two-handed weapons; however, a number of common items are an 
abomination unto Uxip, and cannot be used by followers of the Troika. 
Sohoglyth is a mysterious spirit, but a profoundly powerful one. She 
occasionally sets bonus quests for Troika disciples; if enough of the 
quests are completed with no failures, she will reward the questor with 
the power of telepathy, remote object quality sensing, or even walking 
through walls.

Troika Disciples are in general very strong, especially in combat but 
also sorcery, yet the limitations placed upon them by Uxip and 
Guntujant also make them in some ways vulnerable. In particular, they 
frequently suffer random punishments, risk being punished if they 
teleport from a fight while not at low health, cannot wear a shield or 
cure poison with mushrooms, and must earn the right to use a rod of 
Detection. The spells of Troika disciples are unique in that they are 
not learned at any particular character level; instead, Guntujant and 
Uxip will teach them as a reward for killing dangerous enemies, 
especially uniques. Strength determines the spellcasting ability of a 
Troika disciple.

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      +1        Disarming   Good         
  Intelligence  +0        Device      Bad          
  Wisdom        -1        Save        Bad          
  Dexterity     +1        Stealth     Fair         
  Constitution  +2        Searching   Poor         
  Charisma      +0        Perception  Poor         
  Life Rating  108%       Melee       Good         
  Base HP       23        Bows        Fair         
  Experience   150%
  
TIP: The special random quests for Karrot and Troika disciples can only 
appear if you are sufficiently deep for the quest to be challenging. 
Pressing CTRL+F reveals your patron's opinion of your current depth. 
The Purples also like you to visit many different dungeons; do not 
expect a large number of assignments in a single dungeon, unless you 
are playing with no wilderness.

Table 1 - Disciple Statistic Bonus Table

                  STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  Life  BHP  Exp
Karrot             -1   +1   -1   +0   -1   +1   95%  +14  125%
Yeqrezh            +0   +1   +1   +0   -3   +0   90%  +12  115%
Troika             +1   +0   -1   +1   +2   +0  108%  +23  150%


Table 2 - Disciple Skill Bonus Table I

                  Disarming     Device        Save          Stealth      
Karrot            Poor          Good          Fair          Fair         
Yeqrezh           Poor          Fair          Poor          Fair         
Troika            Good          Bad           Bad           Fair         


Table 3 - Disciple Skill Bonus Table II

                  Searching     Perception    Melee         Bows         
Karrot            Fair          Poor          Fair          Fair         
Yeqrezh           Poor          Poor          Good          Good         
Troika            Poor          Poor          Good          Fair         


Table 4 - Yeqrezh Talents

Disciples of Yeqrezh can choose five special gifts, one every ten 
levels. These gifts can take the form of new abilities, physical 
powers, or rare items; some can be chosen repeatedly, while others can 
only be picked once. Once you have selected a gift, you can never go 
back on your decision, so you might want to study this list to decide 
which gifts to choose for your character.

  Purple Muscles
  Gives +2 STR and +2 DEX.

  Purple Vitality
  All healing effects will give 10% more HP than normally.

  Purple Speed
  Gives +1 speed.

  Purple Deadliness
  Gives +8 melee to-dam (not applied to innate attacks).

  Purple Stealth
  Gives +4 stealth.

  Purple Protection
  Gives +15 AC.

  Device Mastery
  Gives device skills equal to +1 Md.

  Rapid Shooting
  Gives a shooting speed increase equal to +1 Xs.

  Power Sorcery
  Increases your spellpower by +15%, but decreases your life rating by 
  3 points.

  Nervous Casting
  Increases your spellpower by +15%, but makes you vulnerable to fear.

  Easy Casting
  Lowers spell fail rates by 4 percentage points.

  Quick Spelling
  Casting a spell will only consume 93% of the usual time.

  Speedy Recovery
  Gives +100% regeneration.

  Lottery Tickets
  You will receive three scrolls of *Acquirement* from Yeqrezh.

  Notes of Death
  You will receive five scrolls of Mass Genocide from Yeqrezh.

  Essence of Life
  You will receive three potions of Life from Yeqrezh.

  Yeqrezh's Memories
  Immediately gives another 5 character levels.

  Strange Mind
  Protects your mind from hallucination and Eldritch Horrors.

  Strong Mind
  Makes you immune to mana draining.

  Object Lessons
  Allows you to sense the quality of distant objects and automatically 
  identify all objects you walk over.

  Trump Shuffling
  Gives you access to the Shuffle spell, and automatically gives Self 
  Knowledge if the Judgement card is drawn.





Automatically generated for Oposband 0.2.0.

