Monsters                                

There are hundreds of different creatures each of which poses a unique 
challenge to the adventurer. As you progress deeper into the dungeon, 
the creatures will become progressively more difficult to defeat.


Monster Symbols

Many monsters have the same letter symbol and sometimes color on the 
screen. The exact species or type of creature can be discovered by 
looking at it (see [a]).
 
  a   Giant Ant                       A   Angelic being
  b   Giant Bat                       B   Bird
  c   Giant Centipede                 C   Canine
  d   Dragon                          D   Ancient Dragon
  e   Floating Eye                    E   Elemental
  f   Feline                          F   Dragon Fly
  g   Golem                           G   Ghost
  h   Humanoids                       H   Hybrid
  i   Icky-Thing                      I   Insect
  j   Jelly                           J   Snake
  k   Kobold                          K   Killer Beetle
  l   Aquatic monster                 L   Lich
  m   Mold                            M   Multi-Headed Hydra
  n   Naga                            N   Shadower
  o   Orc                             O   Ogre
  p   Human                           P   Giant Human(oid)
  q   Quadruped                       Q   Quylthulg
  r   Rodent                          R   Reptile/Amphibian
  s   Skeleton                        S   Spider/Scorpion/Tick
  t   Townsperson                     T   Troll
  u   Minor demon                     U   Major demon
  v   Vortex                          V   Vampire
  w   Worm or Worm Mass               W   Wight/Wraith
  x   (unused)                        X   Xorn/Xaren
  y   Yeek                            Y   Yeti
  z   Zombie/Mummy                    Z   Zephyr Hound
  $   Creeping Coins                  ,   Mushroom Patch
  #   Ent, Huorn, Fumes

Note that some monsters disguise themselves by assuming the shape (ie. 
symbol) of common objects found in the dungeon. These include the |, ), 
?, !, &, =, #, $ and * symbols.


Monster Colors

You can often determine some information about a monster based solely 
on the color it is described as having, like 'a White Dragon'. In 
general, White monsters are cold-based, Red are fire-based, Blue are 
electrical, Black are acidic, and Green are poisonous and a 
'Multi-Hued' monster is all of these. By being cold-based, we mean that 
the monster has either melee, magical or breath attacks that are cold 
based.

Unfortunately this rule is applied somewhat inconsistently and there 
are several notable exceptions so don't be surprised if that 'Green' 
monster spits acid at you. Note that this rule cannot be applied to the 
actual color a creature is displayed as but only to a color in its 
name.

Other color and attack-type relationships are 'Bronze' and confusion 
and 'Gold' and sound. Over time the inconsistencies referred to above 
will probably get cleaned up.


Monster Memories

Because there are so many monsters and because often different monsters 
share similar colors and symbols; it is very difficult to keep track of 
the capabilities of various creatures. Luckily, the game automatically 
keeps track of your experiences with a particular creature.
 
This feature is called the monster memory. Your monster memory recalls 
the particular attacks of each creature (whether or not technically a 
monster) which you have suffered, as well as recalling if you have 
observed them to multiply or move erratically, or drop treasure, etc. 
Similarly if you attack a creature with a magical attack and it 
resists, that fact is noted.

If you have killed enough of a particular creature, or suffered enough 
attacks, recalling the monster memory may also provide you with 
information not otherwise available, such as an armor class or hit 
dice. These are not explained, but may be useful to give the relative 
danger of each creature.
 
Your monster memory may be accessed by pressing / and then entering the 
symbol you wish to research. Each monster with that symbol of which you 
have some knowledge will displayed in turn beginning with the deepest. 
Alternatively, you may enter targeting mode by pressing * and, with the 
cursor over the creature in question, press r to recall details.

The best feature about your monster memory is that it can be passed on 
to a new character even after you die by means of a reduced save file. 
Simply use your old savefile as the base for creating your new 
character.

Unique Monsters

While there are many humans in the world, there is only one of you. 
Likewise, many monsters can only be killed once, and these monsters are 
called Uniques. A large part of the game involves killing as many 
unique monsters as possible. In fact, you need to kill a certain unique 
to win the game: The Serpent of Chaos. Many quests also involve killing 
a given unique.

Unique monsters are typically based on a normal monster. For example, 
Tom the Stone Troll is based on the Stone Troll monster. However, 
Unique monsters usually have more hitpoints, hit harder and cast spells 
more effectively than the monster on which they are based. Unique 
monsters are often a different color from other monsters of their type 
to allow the player to more easily distinguish them but this is not 
always true.

  Uniques' Resistance to Magic
  
  Unique monsters tend to be more resistant to magic than the other 
  dungeon inhabitants. Thus, slowing, confusing, sleeping and scaring 
  will be less effective and may not work at all. In addition, Genocide 
  and Mass-Genocide spells will never work on Uniques and *Destruction* 
  will teleport them from a level but will not kill them.
  
  Keeping Track of Uniques
  
  Since Unique monsters are often very difficult to defeat, most 
  players will attempt to kill them all before attempting to battle the 
  Serpent of Chaos (itself a Unique monster). This avoids the need to 
  battle two very difficult opponents at the same time.
  
  Each time your character happens upon a new Unique, this is recorded 
  in your monster memory. Under the knowledge command ('~') is a menu 
  item which allows you to look at which Uniques you have met and which 
  of these have been defeated. It is a good idea to check this 
  periodically to gauge your progress. For example:
  
  Knowledge - Monsters
  
  Group                  Name                                       Sym  Kills
  ============================================================================
  Uniques              | Sangahyando of Umbar                         p   dead
  Ridable monsters     | It                                           .   dead
  Wanted monsters      | Azog, King of the Uruk-Hai                   o   dead
  Ant                  | Old Man Willow                               #   dead
  Bat                  | Lugdush, the Uruk                            o  alive
  Centipede            | Bolg, Son of Azog                            o   dead
  Dragon               | Shagrat, the Orc Captain                     o   dead
  Floating Eye         | Meng Huo, the King of Southerings            p   dead
  Feline               | Nar, the Dwarf                               h   dead
  Golem                | The Ghost 'Q'                                G   dead
  Hobbit/Elf/Dwarf     | Ufthak of Cirith Ungol                       o   dead
  Icky Thing           | Lady Zhurong, the Avatar of Flame Spirit     p   dead
  Jelly                | The Variant Maintainer                       p   dead
  Kobold               | Golfimbul, the Hill Orc Chief                o   dead
  Aquatic monster      | Mauhur, the Orc Captain                      o   dead
  Mold                 | Meng You, the Brother of Meng Huo            p  alive
  Naga                 | The Borshin                                  g   dead
  Orc                  | Orfax, Son of Boldor                         y   dead
  Person/Human         | Grishnakh, the Hill Orc                      o  alive
  
  
  Speaking Uniques
  
  Occasionally, you will find that a Unique monster will speak to you 
  as it approaches. Typically, a monster will shout obscenities and 
  challenges to combat but they may also refer to events relating to 
  themselves. The game has no mechanism to allow you to respond to the 
  monsters (other than with violence).
  
  Rewards for Killing Uniques
  
  You may also find that occasionally after killing a Unique monster 
  that the game will tell you that the Unique was wanted. And you will 
  be rewarded for killing it when you take the Unique's corpse to the 
  Hunter's office at the Outpost. The amount of the reward is dependent 
  upon how deep in the dungeon the relevant Unique is normally found.
  
Eldritch Horrors

Some of the monsters in the dungeons are so fearsome to look upon that 
doing so can have serious repercussions. When you meet one of these 
sanity blasting monsters, one of several nasty things may happen to 
you. These include having your intelligence and/or your wisdom 
temporarily reduced, becoming scared or confused, or suffering an 
attack of amnesia.

Pets and Riding

In this game, pets are very useful. In other variants (such as 
Zangband), your pets are often so eager to destroy your opponents that 
they may forget all about you, and you get trampled under their feet as 
they charge at your foe. In PosChengband, however, pets will never 
attack you by mistake; you can walk around in safety even as your pet 
Great Hell Wyrm breaths. Pets will also never be irritated with you; 
their will is perfectly dominated by you, and all pets are permanently 
your pets.

One might think that they can make the game much easier. It is of 
course highly satisfying to send your pet Great Hell Wyrm into a Troll 
pit and wait outside listening for the howls of agony and terror, the 
sounds of guts splattering, bones crunching and so on. But one should 
not expect to gain much experience and item drops for such a combat: 
you will only gain full experience and items for creatures to whom you 
deliver the death blow yourself.

Finally, it takes a lot of mental energy to maintain your control over 
charmed monsters, and start taxing your mana regain rate. The higher 
the sum of the levels of your pets the less mana you will be able to 
regain. And after the upkeep became more then 100% mana, you begin to 
lose mana rather than regain. Keep this in mind if you have a pet which 
can summon or otherwise produce more pets...

  Obtaining a Pet
  
  You may obtain pets in several different ways. Some magic realms 
  offer the ability to summon pets magically or to charm the creatures 
  you meet. Mindcrafters may 'dominate' their opponents. Chaos patrons 
  may grant pets as a gift to their devotees. Magical figurines can be 
  thrown to create a pet and wands of charm monster may be used as 
  their name suggests.
  
  The Capture Ball is very useful tool and any player can use it. You 
  can easily get this tool at a General Store. To use it, you must 
  wield it on your hand, then 'A'ctivate it, and choose a target 
  monster to capture the monster. And then you can 'A'ctivate it again 
  to release the monster as your pet.
  
  Hostile monsters will attempt to resist from capturing. You must make 
  the monster critically injured status before capture. Beastmasters 
  are very good at using Capture Balls, and these limitation are 
  relaxed for them.
  
  Commanding Your Pets
  
  Your pets are fairly well trained and will respond to a variety of 
  commands such as following you closely, staying nearby and searching 
  out your enemies. You can command your pets using the pet command 
  menu which can be found be pressing p.
  
  Here is a list of available pet commands:
  
  Dismiss Pets
    Dismiss specified pets. Dismissed pets will immediately disappear 
    from the current level. PosChengband asks you whether you want to 
    dismiss each pet in order from high level named pets to low level 
    unnamed pets. You can press 'U' to dismiss all unnamed pets.
  
  Specify Target of Pet
    Choose a target monster, then all your pets will begin to chase the 
    target.
  
  Stay Close
    Command your pets to slay as close as they can.
  
  Follow Me
    Command your pets to follow you as you move about.
  
  Seek and Destroy
    Command your pets to chase monsters near you.
  
  Give Me Space
    Command your pets to go away from your line of sight.
  
  Stay Away
    Command your pets to go away as far as they can.
  
  Pets Open Doors
    Toggle permission of pets to open doors.
  
  Pets Pick Up Items
    Toggle permission of pets to pick up items.
  
  Allow Teleport
    Toggle permission of pets to cast teleport spell and teleport away 
    spell.
  
  Allow Cast Attack Spell
    Toggle permission of pets to use attack spells and breath.
  
  Allow Cast Summon Spell
    Toggle permission of pets to cast summoning spells.
  
  Allow Involve Player in Area Spell
    Toggle permission of pets to use ball spells or breath involving 
    player in the area of effect.
   
  Ride a Pet
    Ride on a specified pet.
  
  Get Off a Pet
    Get off from a riding pet.
  
  Name Pets
    Specify a target pet and name it.
  
  Use Both Hands for a Weapon
  Use One Hand to Control a Riding Pet
    Toggle use of your left hand when you are riding. You can wield a 
    weapon two-handed for maximum damage in melee, and command the 
    riding pet to chase your target using the 'specify a target of pet' 
    command.
  
  Riding
  
  In PosChengband, the player can ride on pet horses or dragons, etc. 
  To control your mount, you must keep one hand free for holding the 
  reins. But your pet will attack your target together with you, and 
  enemy's attack will be dispersed. As a result of these, player's 
  damage in combat will get reduced in total.
  
  The most important feature of riding is speed. When you are riding on 
  a pet, your speed doesn't depend on your original speed but depends 
  only on the speed of your mount and your skill at riding. Quaffing a 
  potion of speed has no effect on your mount's speed, but throwing it 
  at a wall will hasten your pet if it is nearby. You can use a wand or 
  a spell of haste monster too.
  
  Note that your proficiency level for riding is very low at first (see 
  'Proficiency' using the Knowledge command ~). When your proficiency 
  level is low, you cannot make good use of riding, and your speed is 
  also very low. You need to practice riding to gain the full speed of 
  the creature you ride. Proficiency level will increase a little when 
  you attack in melee or shoot with missile weapon when riding. Ride on 
  low level creatures at first, and then switch to higher level mounts 
  little by little.
  
Friendly Monsters

You will occasionally find a monster in the dungeon that isn't out to 
get you. Such monsters are described in game messages as being 
'friendly'. A friendly monster will not attempt to hurt you but neither 
will it necessarily attack your enemies.

Unlike pets, if you annoy a friendly monster it will turn against you. 
Like pets, any monsters a friendly monster summons will also be 
friendly. Unlike pets, friendly monsters require no mana upkeep and can 
not be commanded using the pet commands.


Original   : (??)
Updated    : (??)
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Updated    : Hengband 1.0.11
Updated    : PosChengband 4.0.0


