Objects

Objects are a key aspect of the game; much of your effort will be 
devoted to acquiring better, and then even better, objects. Whether 
they are potions to heal you during a difficult fight, scrolls to 
teleport you out of danger, armor to protect you from fire-breathing 
dragons, or swords to slay the minions of evil, objects permeate every 
aspect of your journey from the safety of towns to the dread lair of 
the Serpent of Chaos. Naked, you are nothing; be well-equipped, and 
perhaps, just maybe, you will stand a chance.

There are various types of objects, each with its own symbol for 
display, and often with its own command for use. These will be 
described fully in the reference section near the end of this document 
([a] to skip there); for now, here is an overview.

First, there are objects you may wield or wear as equipment. This 
includes melee weapons (swords, axes, pikes, lances, etc.); armor such 
as suits of chain mail, shields, helmets, cloaks, gloves and boots; 
jewelry (rings and amulets); and light sources like torches and 
lanterns. All of these objects must be equipped with the w command to 
wield or wear them, but your equipment slots are limited; generally, 
you only have one or two slots for any one type of item. Your equipment 
is never going to be perfect; you will spend the entire game trying to 
fill these slots with better and better (and better) gear.

Next, there are objects you carry around in your pack for utility 
purposes, or as provisions. Of course, you need to eat: killing stuff 
is hard work! Equally, you need spare torches (or oil for your lantern) 
to ensure illumination in the dark, dank places where evil lurks. But 
even more, you need magical objects to survive: spellbooks (if you are 
playing a book class); scrolls which all but the stupidest may read; 
magical potions which any may drink; and magic devices (wands, rods and 
staves). Each scroll and magic device produces its own particular spell 
effect when used; most of these effects are good in one way or another 
(offense, healing, speed, teleportation etc.), but some are bad or only 
useful in rare circumstances.

Finally, there are precious metals such as gold. If you are a dwarf, 
you will barely resist singing of your longing for the lost, ancient 
treasures of yore; but other players will find gold just as useful, for 
it is the currency of the realm, accepted by shopkeepers everywhere. 
You can dig for gold or kill monsters for what they have in their 
pockets, but don't lose sight of your real purpose: your ultimate 
objective is to slay the Serpent of Chaos, and gold is but a tool that 
will help you get there.

The next chapters will explain objects in more detail; we will begin 
with how you get objects, then discuss how you learn about their 
powers, and finally discuss how to use them. At the end, we will give a 
table of all the types of objects you might encounter, at a broad 
level. This is a helpfile, and not a spoiler page (and also only 10 
times as long as you'd like, not 100 times), so we won't be listing 
everything that objects might do...

Where Can I Get Stuff?

Every player is born with a starting kit of a few objects to get them 
started on their adventures. The starting kit depends on which class 
you play, but usually it includes a cheap weapon, some torches and 
armor, a few rations of food, and maybe some items particularly 
suitable for your race or class (like spellbooks on a mage). You also 
begin with enough gold to let you buy additional supplies (like Scrolls 
of Teleportation or Potions of Cure Serious Wounds) from the various 
shops in the town. Most shops specialize in a particular class of 
objects (like weapons, bows and arrows at the Weapon Shop); but there 
is also the Black Market, an unregulated forum to buy and sell just 
about anything... at exorbitant prices. Often, you can buy a really 
great object there, but you need to be pretty rich! See [b] for the 
basics of shopping, and [c] for a list of shops.

So town stores are the first place you will get items from, and they 
remain a useful source of basic supplies throughout the game. The most 
valuable objects, though, can only be found deep in the dungeons. 
Sometimes you get lucky and spot something valuable just lying on the 
ground for anyone to take - left behind by previous adventurers, maybe? 
But this is not very common: monsters, too, like to pick up treasures. 
Indeed, it is mostly by killing monsters that you will acquire items; 
many monsters carry objects or money, which you can retrieve should you 
prove skillful enough to defeat them.

Town quests ([d]) are also a good source of valuable items; often, you 
will both find something useful in the quest itself and then get a nice 
object as a reward for your good work. Finally, there is one place in 
the dungeons where good floor items can be relied on: treasure vaults. 
Vaults are usually well-guarded, both by traps and by highly dangerous 
monsters - but as any adventurous hobbit will tell you, sneaking and 
burglary can still go a long way...

Objects can be picked up by moving on top of them and using the get 
command. Turning on the always_pickup option automatizes picking up at 
no extra cost to you - indeed, it allows you to move to a square and 
pick up the items there in a single turn! But indiscriminately picking 
everything up soon fills your inventory with useless dead weight; so 
many players prefer to pick things up manually in combination with use 
of the Mogaminator ([e]), an automatic system based on modifiable rules 
that (hopefully) picks up useful items while destroying junk. During 
your quest to defeat the Serpent you may find tens of thousands of 
objects, so it is nice to have an automatic way to deal with them; and 
if you find the Mogaminator overeager to destroy things, you can turn 
on always_pickup or the leave_mogaminator option ([f]) to make sure 
only true junk is eliminated.

OK, I Found Something. What Does It Do?

When you find an object, you won't know much about it. For example, it 
might be described simply as "a Long Sword", with no other information 
given. You can tell it's a weapon, and therefore that you can wield it 
if you are so inclined... but, is this particular long sword any good? 
Is it magical? Cursed? What other bonuses might it have? This object is 
what we call unidentified, and you will usually want to learn a bit 
more about it before deciding to wield it.

Given time, your character will sense the quality of most unidentified 
objects in their pack. This ability is called pseudo-identification or 
more simply pseudo-ID, and its strength (how much it reveals) and speed 
(whether it kicks in immediately or with some delay) will depend on 
your class, wisdom, character level and mode of play. Pseudo-ID is your 
first line of defense against the onslaught of junk objects; pick stuff 
up, wait a bit if needed (while continuing to play, of course), and 
learn which objects are junk and which might be worthy of further 
investigation. Note that pseudo-ID works best on wearable items; it is 
less useful for magic devices, and does not work for scrolls, potions 
or edibles at all. See [g] below for more information, and a list and 
explanation of all pseudo-ID object feelings.

If this rough object feeling is promising, you will probably want to 
Identify the object. The ideal way to do this is with either a spell or 
with a Staff of Identify; but most characters never get an Identify 
spell, and Staves of Identify are expensive. Until you can afford one, 
you can use Scrolls of Identify or the town service provided by Count 
Uldrik as a stopgap; and magical devices can often be identified simply 
by trying them out.

Identifying an object reveals its full name, damage dice or multipliers 
(if any), and magical bonuses to accuracy, deadliness and armor class. 
The object's name tells you whether the item is a valuable ego or even 
an artifact; and Identify will also tell you if the object has a curse 
on it. Inspecting an identified item will show everything you learned, 
as well as provide a rough estimate of the object's monetary value.

In the case of ego items and artifacts Identify may not be enough; 
special powers might remain hidden. Sometimes those extra powers can be 
learned simply by equipping and using the object (though this is risky 
with cursed items!); for example, you will notice if the item increases 
your stats. Other attributes might take much longer to learn, though; 
if the item grants resistance to fire, you would need to get hit with a 
fire attack to find out.

It is possible to learn everything about an object this way, but doing 
so is much too time-consuming, especially as the game progresses. There 
are two much quicker ways to learn everything: *Identify* and selling. 
The first is available as a spell, scroll, device or town service, and 
is somewhat expensive; but it instantly reveals everything about the 
item. The second method is to simply sell an item to a shop; this 
produces the same result (the item is *Identified* by the shopkeeper) 
and is the opposite of expensive (you're the one who makes money!); but 
if the item turned out to be actually good, getting it back could be 
very expensive indeed...

How Good is this Object, Anyway?

The broad quality of equipment is given by the strong version of 
pseudo-ID: objects are, in increasing order of quality, either average, 
good/bad, excellent/awful or special/terrible. What does this mean?

If you did some shopping, then you probably saw what average equipment 
looks like. For example, you might have seen this inventory at the 
Weapon Smiths:

    Solvistani the Ranger (Wood-Elf)                     Weapon Smiths (25000)  
                                                                                
    Item Description                                               Weight  Price
 a) ? a Rage Spellbook [Northern Frights]                         3.0 lbs   1610
 b) ~ a Quiver [100]                                              1.0 lbs    423
 c) ~ a Quiver [70]                                               1.0 lbs     61
 d) | a Rapier (1d8) (+0,+0) {25% off}                            4.0 lbs     35
 e) | a Small Sword (1d8) (+0,+0)                                 7.5 lbs     89
 f) | a Short Sword (1d8) (+0,+0)                                 8.0 lbs     95
 g) | a Sabre (1d9) (+0,+0)                                       5.0 lbs     68
 h) | a Broad Sword (2d6) (+0,+0)                                15.0 lbs    330
 i) | a Bastard Sword (3d5) (+0,+0)                              14.0 lbs    411
 j) / a Sickle (2d4) (+0,+0)                                      7.0 lbs    182
 k) / 2 Tridents (1d10) (+0,+0)                                   7.0 lbs    192
 l) / a Fauchard (1d12) (+0,+0)                                  15.5 lbs    319
 m) / a Broad Axe (2d7) (+5,+2)                                  13.0 lbs   1340
 n) / a Lance (2d10) (+0,+0)                                     30.0 lbs    750
 o) / a Battle Axe (2d9) (+4,+3)                                 17.0 lbs   1700
 p) } a Short Bow (x2.50) (+3,+6)                                 3.0 lbs   1540
 q) { 43 Bolts (3d5) (+0,+0)                                      0.3 lbs      6
 r) { 39 Arrows (3d4) (+0,+0)                                     0.2 lbs      3
 
Here, we see a bunch of different types of weapons, each of which is 
fully *Identified* (as objects in town shops always are). They don't 
look very impressive, though! First of all, you can notice that each 
type of weapon has different damage dice: 3d5 or the like. These work 
in a very simple way: for example, a 3d5 Bastard Sword means rolling 
three five-sided dice (which gives an average of 9 damage per strike), 
while a 1d9 Sabre (roll a single nine-sided die, if such a thing could 
be imagined!) gives an average of 5 damage per blow.

Next, you may notice that (+0,+0) is repeated over and over again. 
That's because all of these objects are average. Hey, this small-town 
Weapon Smith is no wizard; he just forges weapons of average quality, 
and might occasionally buy something more interesting from intrepid 
adventurers (like yourself!). The (+0,+0) simply gives the object's 
combat bonuses: the first +0 is the accuracy (to-hit) bonus, which 
affects your chance to hit monsters with that weapon; the second +0 is 
the damage bonus (to-dam), which gets added to the total rolled by the 
damage dice if you land a blow with that weapon.

Objects can be magically enhanced, at which point they become good 
objects. This means nothing more than that (+0,+0) becomes something 
non-zero, giving you bonuses either to hit, or to damage, or both. For 
example, you might have noticed that Short Bow (x2.50) (+3,+6). The 
(x2.50) is part of every average short bow, and is called the damage 
multiplier; see [h] for an explanation of that. But bows have combat 
bonuses just as melee weapons do, and they mean the same thing here: 
the bow gives +3 to hit (making you more accurate with it), and +6 to 
damage (making you more deadly as well). That would be a nice starting 
bow - but alas, it costs 1540 gold pieces, which is more than I have.

Excellent Objects

So that's average and good objects. What about excellent objects? And 
special objects? Excellent objects are called ego items (a term of 
mysterious origin), and each ego item represents a particular ego type. 
For example, a Long Sword of Slaying (2d6) (+7,+3) {/o} represents the 
Slaying weapon ego type! Ego types vary greatly; some egos predictably 
always give the same bonuses to an item, while others are much more 
random. The Slaying ego is somewhat random within limits - what exactly 
does that weapon slay? Our example long sword, for instance, slays orcs 
(I can tell without inspection by the {/o}); but the next Slaying 
weapon you find might slay demons and animals instead.

Our example sword is not a particularly powerful or exciting ego item; 
it is simply more deadly against orcs. More precisely, it will do 2.8 
times as much damage from the base damage dice against orcs: roll two 
six-sided dice (2d6), add up the result, and multiply by 2.8 if the 
monster struck is an orc; then add in the +3 damage bonus, and maybe 
other damage bonuses from elsewhere. Slays are a fairly common ego 
weapon effect; but ego items can do many other things as well, like 
boost your stats, give you resistances or other important abilities, or 
even activate for various magical effects.

Initially, your character will not know very much about ego items; so 
some of their effects might remain hidden after simple Identify. For 
example, the Long Sword might show as a Long Sword of Slaying (2d6) 
(+7,+3) {?} until we discovered (through selling, *Identify* or by 
hitting an orc) that it slays orcs. But learning this new fact also 
teaches us something new about the Slaying ego: the next time we find a 
Slaying weapon that slays orcs, simple Identify will let us recognize 
the orc slay, although other slays on the weapon might still be hidden.

Special Objects

Special objects are artifacts. Think of these as unique objects: you 
can only find any one artifact once in a particular game, and they can 
be substantially more powerful than an ordinary ego item. Like egos, 
artifacts can give combat bonuses, armor bonuses, stat bonuses, 
resistances, abilities, slays and other (generally) nice stuff. There 
are two basic types of artifact: standard artifacts, which are the same 
in every game, and random artifacts, which are highly unpredictable. 
Generally, you will want to *Identify* every artifact you find; even if 
you have played the game before and recognize a familiar standard 
artifact, it might have some random bonus.

Artifacts are almost indestructible; they cannot be harmed by the base 
elements, are more resistant to disenchantment than other items, and 
can only be completely destroyed in exotic circumstances.

Cursed Objects

What about the evil end of the pseudo-ID spectrum (bad -> awful -> 
terrible)? These objects are cursed, but they need not be junk. Well, 
bad objects are just the opposite of good ones, so they genuinely are 
junk; but awful objects are ego items that happen to have some bad 
attributes (either because of a random curse or because the ego type is 
inherently cursed), and terrible items are artifacts that similarly 
have bad attributes on top of the good. Whether or not these items 
remain useful is up to you to determine: sometimes they are junk, 
sometimes the good can outweigh the bad. In either case, you will need 
*identify* to discover everything.

All cursed items have one thing in common: you cannot take off cursed 
equipment while it is still cursed. Most equipment can be uncursed; 
this will allow you to take it off, but will not necessarily remove all 
of its other downsides.

We've talked a lot about equipment; it is time to move on to utility 
objects you might want to carry in your inventory.

Object Flavors

Mushrooms, potions and scrolls have flavors: you might find a Black 
Spotted Mushroom or a Bubbling Potion. Flavors and item effects go 
hand-in-hand; if the bubbling potion turns out to be a Potion of 
Healing, then all other bubbling potions are also Potions of Healing 
and all Potions of Healing will be bubbling potions.

Flavored items can be fully identified with normal Identify (you can 
also try to identify them by using them... if you are very brave). By 
default, flavors are only displayed for unidentified items; once you 
have identified one Bubbling Potion, both it and all future Bubbling 
Potions will be displayed simply as Potions of Healing.

You only need to identify any given flavor once per game; but flavors 
change between games. Next game you play, Bubbling Potions might be 
Potions of Salt Water instead!

Jewelry

While rings and amulets are wearable objects, they differ from weapons 
and armor in an important way: there is no such thing as good jewelry. 
Rings and amulets are always either average, ego or artifacts; average 
jewelry has no effect at all, and is only useful for reforging.

There aren't very many different jewelry ego types, but those that do 
exist allow high variability; the ego type is essentially a theme that 
allows a particular set of attributes, but which of those attributes 
any one piece of jewelry generates with is very random.

Object Lore

Every time you identify any attribute on an ego item or a standard 
artifact, you also learn about the artifact or ego item type. This is 
called object lore and will help you recognize the same attribute on 
similar future items, without the need to *Identify*. By default, 
object lore is kept in your savefile after death just like monster 
lore, although you can change this with the empty_lore option ([i]).

You can view your current artifact and ego lore at any time through the 
~ Knowledge Menu. There is no real advantage to doing so, but it can be 
a fun distraction!

Devices

Magical devices include wands, staves and rods. Since these are 
available in town, I'll talk you through one example in detail without 
much of a guilty conscience over spoilers. Here's a basic wand:

a Wand: Stinking Cloud
  This device has the following magical strength:
  Power  : 13
  Mana   : 10/39

  This device is loaded with a spell:
  Spell  : Stinking Cloud
  Info   : dam 15
  Level  : 8
  Cost   : 4
  Charges: 2/9
  Fail   : 2.4%
  Desc   : It fires a ball of poison.

It may help if you already familiar with spellcasting, since one way to 
think of devices is as spellcasters with access to a single spell. The 
device, just like a spellcaster, has a casting level (labelled as 
Power) and spell points (Mana); and the spell it is loaded with has a 
spell level, mana cost and fail rate just as normal spells do.

The Power of a device determines how much mana the device can have, 
which spell effects it had a chance to generate with, and how difficult 
it is to use. Power also determines how strong the spell is; sometimes 
this has no practical meaning at all, but in our Stinking Cloud example 
the dam 15 is a direct result of the device's power.

The Mana of the device indicates how many times the device can be used 
before it needs to "rest" a bit. Traditionally, this has been displayed 
as charges; our example device has 2 charges right now, but 9 when 
fully charged. You can see this matches the device's mana and the 
spell's mana cost: with its current 10 mana, the wand has 10/4 = 2 (and 
a half) charges, and at full 39 mana it would have 9 charges and a bit.

There is no need to throw a device away once all of its charges have 
been spent: devices also resemble spellcasters in that their mana 
regenerates. This happens much faster on rods than on wands or staves.

The Fail Rate of the device indicates the probability that you fail to 
use it successfully. This depends on the device's power, the player's 
device skill, and the inherent difficulty of the spell effect itself. 
Fail rates never hit zero, but our example wand comes pretty close at 
2.4%; due to its low level and fairly unimpressive effect, it is very 
easy to use. Devices differ from spellcasters in that failed attempts 
to use a device do not consume mana.

Devices, like equipment, can be ego; but the difference between average 
devices and ego devices is much smaller than that between average and 
ego equipment. The ego type simply gives the device one of a handful of 
special attributes:
   
   Power         The device's spells are more powerful than its casting 
                 level would indicate.
   Simplicity    The device is easier to use than its effect and 
                 casting level would indicate.
   Holding       The device is resistant to having its charges drained 
                 by monsters.
   Regeneration  The device's mana regenerates much faster than 
                 normally (+100% regen per pval point).
   Resistance    The device cannot be destroyed by the base elements.
   Capacity      The device has an unusually large mana pool.
   Quickness     Using the device consumes less than a full turn (-10% 
                 energy cost per pval point).
   
See [j] for an overview of the differences between wands, rods and 
staves, as well as the somewhat similar scrolls and potions.

Spellbooks

Many spellcasters need books in order to learn and cast spells. Books 
do not require identification, and each spellbook of the same type is 
exactly the same. No issues of object knowledge or quality to worry 
about! See [k] for more on spellbooks and the magic system.

Object Inscriptions

This is an advanced topic which you may want to skip if you are just 
getting started; but inscriptions, once learned, are very powerful and 
useful. The Mogaminator automatically inscribes some items, so 
activating it is a good way to both get easy utility out of 
inscriptions and to see how they work in practice.

Inscriptions are text appended to individual objects; the game uses 
inscriptions on an object to communicate information to you, and you 
can use inscriptions to communicate back to the game.

To add an inscription, use the { command, then type whatever you like. 
If you later decide to remove that inscription, use }. Note that 
inscriptions are displayed to you inside curly braces as {inscription}, 
so the inscription commands themselves should be easy to remember. In 
the original keyset, the Z key is functionally identical with {, and 
can be used as a convenient substitute if { is hard to access on your 
system or keyboard.

  Fake Inscriptions
  
  These are added by the game to communicate information to the player. 
  Pseudo-ID, for example, communicates the quality of an item through a 
  fake inscription; so you might have "a Long Sword {special}" where 
  the object feeling is displayed as an inscription between curly 
  braces. These inscriptions are "fake" in that no literal inscription 
  is involved; the game simply displays the information as if it were 
  an inscription. Fake inscriptions include the following:
  
  Type             Comment
  Pseudo-ID        Displays the quality of the object as average, good, 
                   excellent, etc. These inscriptions will be removed 
                   once the player identifies the object.
  Discount         If an item is purchased at a discount, this fake 
                   inscription displays that discount. You can turn it 
                   off with the [l] show_discounts option.
  Abbreviations    Indicate the resistances, slays, stat bonuses and 
                   other attributes an item has. See [m] below for a 
                   list of the abbreviations that might appear.
  
  Useful Inscriptions
  
  "Real" inscriptions include those you type in yourself, using the { 
  command, as well as those added by the Mogaminator. These 
  inscriptions can be any text you like, maybe a note to yourself "this 
  potion is probably Speed" before you have officially identified it. 
  Alternatively, you can use special syntax to communicate your 
  preferences to the game; let's call these useful inscriptions.
  
  The most useful use of the useful inscriptions (sorry!) is to control 
  object selection when entering a given command. For example, when a 
  Mage goes to cast a spell (using the m command), they are prompted 
  for a spellbook, which they must select from their inventory. By 
  default, this choice is made through a letter label corresponding to 
  the book's position in a list of all available books, for example:
  
  Inventory
   a) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Sign of Chaos]
   b) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Chaos Mastery]
   c) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Beginner's Handbook]
   d) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Master Sorcerer's Handbook]
  
  I only have 4 spellbooks at the moment, so this choice is not too 
  bad. But let's say I get very used to casting spells from my [Chaos 
  Mastery] book with something like mbe, where e corresponds to a 
  particular spell in that book. Now, along comes an arch-vile who 
  burns up one of my books, perhaps my [Sign of Chaos]. Now, the prompt 
  for a spellbook looks like:
  
  Inventory
   a) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Chaos Mastery]
   b) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Beginner's Handbook]
   c) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Master Sorcerer's Handbook]
  
  If I fail to notice that the letters for my books changed, or if I am 
  so darned used to typing mbe for the spell I want - or if I built a 
  macro for the spell I wanted - I am in for a nasty surprise. Instead 
  of casting the spell I want from [Chaos Mastery], I'll be casting 
  something else entirely from my [Beginner's Handbook]!
  
  This type of reordering happens with all kinds of objects: your 
  inventory sorts itself as you find stuff, and objects move around. As 
  they move, the letters you enter to select them move around as well. 
  To deal with these situations, use the special inscription of the 
  form: @Command-LetterChoice-Label. For example, perhaps I should try 
  adding @mb to my [Chaos Mastery]? And to illustrate a point, I will 
  actually inscribe it with "Master of @mb Chaos" (the point being that 
  @mb just needs to be part of the inscription, not the entire 
  inscription). Now, here is what I see:
  
  Inventory
   b) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Chaos Mastery] {Master of @mb Chaos}
   a) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Beginner's Handbook]
   c) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Master Sorcerer's Handbook]
  
  Better, but not ideal; my copy of [Beginner's Handbook] has 
  unexpectedly moved to the a) slot, which will likely also throw me 
  off! This illustrates an important principle with regard to 
  spellbooks: if you inscribe one spellbook, it is a good idea to 
  inscribe all of them. Most players use @ma through @md for their 
  first realm of magic (each realm has four spellbooks) and @me through 
  @mh for their second realm; the Mogaminator even does this 
  automatically. Let's see what effect this has:
  
  Inventory
   b) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Chaos Mastery] {Master of @mb Chaos}
   e) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Beginner's Handbook] {@me}
   f) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Master Sorcerer's Handbook] {@mf}
  
  That's better. My inventory, you remember, still looks like this:
  
  Inventory | Equipment                                                         
   a) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Chaos Mastery] {Master of @mb Chaos}
   b) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Beginner's Handbook] {@me}
   c) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Master Sorcerer's Handbook] {@mf}
   d) , 9 Rations of Food
   e) ~ 4 Wooden Torches (with 3500 turns of light)
  
  All we are doing is using inscriptions to change the lettering of 
  choices, and then, only for the m command. If I browse my spellbooks, 
  I am back in my original situation. Of course, I can rectify this by 
  appending inscriptions of the form @ba through @bh to all of my 
  books; or, since I don't use the Browse command that often, I can 
  simply slow down and read the prompt.
  
  There is another option, though: instead of using the format 
  @Command-LetterChoice-Label, I could use @Choice-Digit where the 
  label is a single digit between 0 and 9 and the command-letter is 
  omitted. For example, I could inscribe my books with @1 through @8:
  
  Inventory
   1) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Sign of Chaos] {@1}
   2) ? a Chaos Spellbook [Chaos Mastery] {@2}
   5) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Beginner's Handbook] {@5}
   6) ? a Sorcery Spellbook [Master Sorcerer's Handbook] {@6}
  
  Now, I can cast my desired spell with m2e, browse my [Master 
  Sorcerer's Handbook] with b6 and learn a new spell from [Sign of 
  Chaos] with G1; the same numbers apply for all commands.
  
  What Else Can Inscriptions Do?
  
  Controlling object selection letters is not the only useful 
  inscription; you can also have the game prompt for confirmation when 
  attempting to use an object with a given command. For example, 
  suppose you just found a Potion of Super-Duper Healing, and you 
  really want to make sure you do not quaff it by mistake. To protect 
  this potion from accidental quaffing, add the inscription !q, which 
  is of the form !Command-Letter. Now, whenever I try to quaff the 
  potion - whether accidentally or intentionally - the game will prompt 
  me for confirmation.
  
  If I am paranoid, I can increase the prompting with the inscription 
  !q!q, or even !q!q!q!q; the game will prompt me once for each !q in 
  the inscription, making extra-sure that I only have myself to blame 
  when I still quaff this potion by mistake.
  
  A related inscription is !*; it works on the same principle as !q, 
  but uses the wild-card * to have the game prompt you for every 
  command that uses the object. You cannot quaff it by accident, sell 
  it by accident, drop it by accident, destroy it by accident... we 
  cater to the most paranoid of players!
  
  So we have @Command-LetterChoice-Label as well as @Choice-Digit to 
  control object labeling; and !Command-Letter to add confirmation 
  prompts before using an object in various ways. What else can we do? 
  Quite a bit actually. Try the following:
  
  Inscription  Meaning
      !!       Disturb the player when the inscribed object (typically 
               a magical device, but this also works for equipment 
               activations) is fully recharged. This means you can 
               issue a long rest command like R777\r to rest for 777 
               turns, and the game will interrupt your dozing once your 
               device is ready for use again (unless it still hasn't 
               finished recharging, which is a real possibility...)
      !1       Disturb the player when the inscribed device has 
               recharged enough to have 1 charge again.
      =g       Automatically pick this object up. Use this on your 
               arrows and such, and you can quickly regather discharged 
               ammunition after a lengthy shooting battle.
      .        Suppress the prompt for random teleportation on objects 
               with this attribute.
      $        Suppress the warning prompt for items that warn you 
               before taking dangerous actions. Of course, this defeats 
               the warning altogether, but sometimes you are confident 
               enough in your own decisions to forgo second-guessing by 
               pretentious jewelry.
      !?       Request confirmation of melee attacks, a handy 
               inscription if you are so weak in physical combat that 
               any melee you might engage in would likely be 
               accidental. The inscription can be combined with a 
               monster level, e.g. !?40, to only request confirmation 
               for attacks against monsters of (in this example) level 
               40 or above.
  
  Finally, there is also a special inscription form ^Command-Letter. 
  Adding this to a worn piece of equipment causes the game to prompt 
  for verification every time you attempt the indicated command, even 
  if the command is one not involving the object in question. If you 
  like, you could inscribe (say) ^<^> on your boots; and the game will 
  now prompt for confirmation every time you attempt to use the < and > 
  commands!
  
    Command letters used in inscriptions must always match 
    the commands of the underlying keyset. If you use the 
    default Original Keyset this is not a problem, but if 
    you have switched to the roguelike keyset, stay alert, 
    as you may need to use unfamiliar command-letters.
  
The Reference Section

Object Symbols

  !   Potions, flasks                 /   Polearms
  ?   Scrolls, spellbooks             |   Edged weapons
  ,   Mushrooms/food                  \   Hafted weapons
  -   Rods (always dark red)          }   Ranged weapons
  -   Wands (always light blue)       {   Ammunition
  _   Staves                          (   Soft armor, cloaks
  =   Rings                           [   Hard armor
  "   Amulets                         ]   Misc. armor
  $   Gold or gems                    )   Shields
  ~   Lamps, spikes, quivers          &   Chests
  ~   Junk, sticks, skeletons, etc    *   Unusual objects
  `   Statues, figurines

Commands for Using Objects

Where two commands separated by a / are indicated, the first is the 
command in the standard keyset and the second the command in the 
roguelike keyset.

  !  Potion        quaff
  ?  Scroll        read
  ?  Spellbook     browse/peruse, Gain a spell, m to cast
  ,  Food/Mushroom Eat
  -  Wand          aim/zap
  -  Rod           zap/activate
  _  Staff         use/Zap
  &  Chest         search for trap, Disarm, open
  {  Ammo          fire/shoot at target, wield to put in quiver

With most equipment, you simply need to use the wear command:
/|\} Weapons/Bows  wield, t/Take off
([]) Armor         wear, t/Take off
  =  Ring          wear, t/Take off
  "  Amulet        wear, t/Take off
  ~  Quiver        wear, drop ammo, t/Take off
  ~  Lantern       wear, t/Take off, Fuel

Numbers on Items

     (2d6)            Damage dice
     (x2.50)          Damage multiplier (shooters only)
     (+4,+6)          Accuracy and damage bonuses
     (-2)             Accuracy penalty (armor only)
     (+2)             Damage bonus (boots and gloves only)
     [15,+10]         Base AC (Armor Class) and bonus AC
     [+10]            Bonus AC (items with no base AC)
     (+2)             Pval (size of stat and ability bonuses)
     {+15%}           Device power bonus
     <+15%>           Spell power bonus
     [+15%]           Spell capacity bonus

Equipment

The number and kinds of equipment you may wear depends on your racial 
body type. The usual body type is humanoid:

 a) | Right Hand: a Dagger (1d5) (+0,+0)
 b) ) Left Hand : a Small Leather Shield [3,+0]
 c) } Shooting  : a Short Bow (x2.50) (+3,+6)
 d) ~ Quiver    : a Quiver [0 of 80]
 e) = Right Ring: a Ring of Combat (+5,+0) {Fe A:Earthquake}
 f) = Left Ring : a Ring of Protection [+1] {Wr~L(Wi}
 g) " Neck      : an Amulet
 h) ~ Light     : a Wooden Torch (with 1999 turns of light)
 i) ( Body      : Soft Leather Armour [4,+0]
 j) ( Cloak     : a Cloak [1,+3]
 k) ] Head      : an Iron Helm [5,+5]
 l) ] Hands     : a Set of Leather Gloves [1,+5]
 m) ] Feet      : a Pair of Soft Leather Boots [2,+3]

Many Monster mode races have unique body types, and adapting to 
different equipment possibilities is part of the fun of playing as a 
monster!

Inventory/Pack

The size of your pack also slightly varies, but most characters have 26 
slots in their inventory. You can place any object you like in your 
pack, and objects here will sort and stack as allowed; however, should 
your pack grow too heavy, your character will become encumbered and 
will gradually move slower and slower. View your equipment with the 
equipment command, and your inventory with the inventory command. 
Examine items in detail with the Inspect command. Add objects to your 
pack with the get command and equip objects for use with the wear 
command. You can remove an equipped object with the take off command, 
and discard an item with either the drop command, which places the item 
on the ground, or the kill command, which destroys the object.

Pseudo-ID

To recap, pseudo-ID is the ability to roughly sense the quality of 
unidentified objects in your pack (or equipment!), and it comes in two 
forms: strong and weak. The speed and strength of the sensing varies 
with class, wisdom, and virtue of the player. From birth in 
coffee-break mode, and from CL20 otherwise, players automatically sense 
the quality of objects underfoot, and this sensing is always strong 
regardless of class; so weak pseudo-ID is only relevant in the early 
game.

Pseudo-ID communicates the quality of an object via a fake inscription 
on that object. For example, you might have a Long Sword {excellent} or 
Hard Studded Leather {terrible}. The meanings of these object feelings 
are indicated by the tables below:
  
  Table 1 - Strong Pseudo-ID
  Inscription    Meaning
  Terrible       a cursed artifact
  Awful          a cursed ego item
  Bad            a cursed nameless item
  Average        an average item
  Good           an enchanted item
  Excellent      a non-cursed ego item
  Special        a non-cursed artifact
  
  Or, to put this another way:
  
                     Egos         Artifacts
  Average -> Good -> Excellent -> Special
          -> Bad  -> Awful     -> Terrible
  
  Table 2 - Weak Pseudo-ID
  Inscription    Meaning
  Average        an average item
  Cursed         a cursed item (includes cursed ego items and 
                 artifacts)
  Enchanted      an enchanted item (includes good ego items and 
                 artifacts)
  
List of Abbreviations

  At : extra blows                    Ac : resistance to acid
  Sp : affects speed                  El : resistance to electricity
  St : affects strength               Fi : resistance to fire
  In : affects intelligence           Co : resistance to cold
  Wi : affects wisdom                 Po : resistance to poison
  Dx : affects dexterity              Li : resistance to light
  Cn : affects constitution           Dk : resistance to darkness
  Ch : affects charisma               Cf : resistance to confusion
  Md : affects magic devices          Nt : resistance to nether
  Sl : affects stealth                Nx : resistance to nexus
  Sr : affects searching ability      So : resistance to sound
  If : affects infravision            Sh : resistance to shards
  Dg : affects tunneling ability      Ca : resistance to chaos
  Lf : affects your life rating       Di : resistance to disenchantment
  *Ac: immune to acid                 Ti : resistance to time
  *El: immune to electricity          Bl : resistance to blindness
  *Fi: immune to fire                 Fe : resistance to fear
  *Co: immune to cold

  Es : easy spell                     [F : fiery sheath
  Dm : decreases mana consumption     [E : electric sheath
  Th : suitable for throwing          [C : cold sheath
  Rf : reflection                     [Sh: aura of shards
  Fa : free action                    [At: aura of retaliation
  Si : see invisible                  [M : anti-magic shell
  Hl : hold life                      [T : prevents teleportation
  Sd : slow digestion                 [Mr: magic resistance
  Id : loremastery (auto-identify)    [Sm: anti-summoning shell
  Rg : regeneration                   |A : acid brand
  Lv : levitation                     |E : electricity brand
  Lu : extra light                    |F : fire brand
  Wr : provides warning               |Co: cold brand
  Xm : extra might when shooting      |P : poison brand
  Xs : extra shots (shooting speed)   |Dk: darkness brand
  Te : random teleportaion            |V : vampiric weapon
  Ag : aggravate monsters             |Q : impact weapon
  Bs : blessed                        |S : sharp weapon
  Ty : ancient foul curse             |SS: really sharp weapon
  Ds : darkness                       |M : mana brand
  Nv : night vision                   |Ca: mark of chaos
  Wm : weaponmastery (extra dice)     |St: hits to stun

  /* : slay evil                      /X* : *slay* evil
  /p : slay human                     /Xp : *slay* human
  /D : slay dragon                    /XD : *slay* dragon
  /o : slay orc                       /Xo : *slay* orc
  /T : slay troll                     /XT : *slay* troll
  /P : slay giant                     /XP : *slay* giant
  /U : slay demon                     /XU : *slay* demon
  /L : slay undead                    /XL : *slay* undead
  /Z : slay animal                    /XZ : *slay* animal
  /A : slay good
  /Lv: slay living

  ~Tele : telepathy                   (St : sustain strength
  ~Evil : ESP evil                    (In : sustain intelligence
  ~Good : ESP good                    (Wi : sustain wisdom
  ~Nolv : ESP non-living              (Dx : sustain dexterity
  ~Lvng : ESP living                  (Cn : sustain constitution
  ~p : ESP human                      (Cn : sustain charisma
  ~D : ESP dragon
  ~o : ESP orc
  ~T : ESP troll
  ~P : ESP giant
  ~U : ESP demon
  ~L : ESP undead
  ~Z : ESP animal

For example, armor with base resistance would display as {AcElFiCo} 
while a really good weapon might display as {Cn;LuAg|VS/XU/*~U}, 
meaning it gives a bonus to Constitution, grants increased light 
radius, aggravates monsters, is both vampiric and sharp (|V and |S; 
notice the second | does not repeat), has *slay* demons, also slays 
evil and grants ESP demons as well. (Quick quiz: which item is it?)

Inscriptions: Summary

Inscription Form     Meaning
@Command-LetterChoice-Label
                     Use the given choice label (a-z, A-Z or 0-9) to 
                     select the inscribed object whenever the 
                     Command-Letter command is issued.

@Choice-Digit        Use the given choice digit (0-9) to select the 
                     inscribed object whenever any command is issued.

!Command-Letter      Prompt for verification whenever attempting to use 
                     the inscribed object with the Command-Letter 
                     command.

!*                   Prompt for verification whenever attempting to use 
                     the inscribed object with any command.

!!                   Disturb the player whenever the inscribed object 
                     is fully recharged.

!1                   Disturb the player whenever the inscribed object 
                     has recharged enough to have 1 charge.

=g                   Automatically pick up the inscribed object.
.                    Disable prompt for random teleportation.
$                    Disable warning prompt.
!?                   Request confirmation for melee attacks.

^Command-Letter      Prompt for verification whenever the 
                     Command-Letter command is issued, provided the 
                     inscribed object is currently being worn.

Be sure to read [n] if this is unclear to you.

--
Original   : (??)
Updated    : (??)
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Updated    : Hengband 1.3.0
Updated    : PosChengband 4.0.0
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.chocolate
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.liquorice


