The Towns and Wilderness

After you have created your character, you will begin your adventure in 
a town called Outpost. If you are playing in Beginner Mode, or another 
mode that switches off the wilderness, this is the only town in the 
game; if not, you will find many other towns in the wide world.

Symbols appearing on your screen represent the buildings, streets, shop 
entrances, terrain, and townspeople. In order to direct your character 
through his adventure, you will enter single-character commands (see 
[a]).

Town and Wilderness Symbols

The symbols on your map can be broken down into three broad categories: 
terrain features; objects which can be picked up; and creatures both 
friendly and hostile. Listed below are some of the terrain symbols you 
are likely to see often in the town and the wilderness:


  Town and Wilderness Terrain   Shops and Buildings
  ----------------------        -------------------------------
  #   Tree/wooded area          #   Building wall
  .   Patch of grass            1   Entrance to General Store
  :   Flower                       Entrance to Armoury
  :   Brake                     3   Entrance to Weapon Shop
  .   Swamp                     4   Entrance to Temple Shop
  ~   Shallow water             5   Entrance to Alchemy Shop
  ~   Deep water                6   Entrance to Magic Shop
  ~   Shallow lava              7   Entrance to Black Market
  ~   Deep lava                 8   Entrance to your home
  #   Dark pit                  9   Entrance to Book Store
  #   Mountains                 0   Entrance to Shroomery
  .   Floor/road                "   Entrance to Jewelry Store
  .   Dirt                      M   Entrance to Museum
  .   Grass                     +   Entrance to non-shop building
  >   Dungeon entrance          +   Entrance to non-shop building
  >   Quest entrance


What to Expect in a Town

The exact appearance of Outpost depends on whether you are playing with 
the wilderness on or off, but the basics are the same either way: you 
will find a number of shops where items can be bought and sold, plus a 
handful of other buildings where items are not on display but services 
or interesting quests might be offered instead. As a general rule, the 
symbols for shop entrances are usually numerical (such as 5 for the 
Alchemy Shop), while buildings that offer services or quests are 
denoted with the character + in various colors. Outside these rules are 
your home 8 and the museum M, which are not shops but also do not offer 
quests or services.

A glimpse of Outpost as it appears with the wilderness on can be seen 
below:

#~~.#############.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~####~.....:......::.:...# LEVEL      1
#~~######+++######~~##########################~......:##:##:....... EXP       16
#~~#####.....#####~~##########################~........####......#: AU       595
#~~~~~.........~~~~~##.....................###~............##::.... |       (   
##~~~~~~~...~~~~~~~~##.#########.#########.##~~......::....::#::#.. STR :     16
#########...##########.#########.#########.##~~.....#::.::##:#:.::: INT :     14
#########...#########..####2####.#########.##~~........::##:::.:.:. WIS :      8
......###...###............................##~~.....:..::..::.::.#. DEX :  18/50
......................................####.##~~......#.::::::##:#.: CON :     17
......................................3###.###~.......:#:::.:#>##:: CHR :     12
......................................####.###~................#... AC        15
...........................................###~.................... HP   37/  37
...................................@...............................             
.................................###+####..###~.......#..##.#.#....             
.................................########..###~.......:.#.....::.:#             
.................................########..##~~..................#.             
....................................#####..##~~.......#............             
....................................#####..##~~..........:.:......:             
..................................#######..##~~............#.##..:.             
..........................#####...#######..##~~......:.....::##.::#             
...........................####............##~~............#::#....             
##.........................7###...#######..##~~.....#......#...:##:             
#9................####8....####...#######..##~~............:.::....             
##......#.#.......#####...#####...#######..##~~......:#............             
.......##M##...............................##~~...........###:#....             
Outpost


The > to the east is a dungeon entrance, and is actually where you 
start the game, but it is not a good idea to enter the dungeon 
immediately! Do some shopping first, maybe even complete a couple of 
town quests. The @ symbol marks the player's location; and directly to 
the player's southeast is the entrance to the White Horse Inn, one of 
two buildings in this wilderness-on version of Outpost to offer quests. 
The other one is also visible here - that large multi-entrance building 
to the northwest, which is the castle of Uldrik, the Count of Outpost. 
Visit these two buildings, press q to request your first quests, and 
decide if you're brave enough to take them on immediately.

A few of the town's shops are also visible here, as well as your home 
8. Additional shops not visible in this shot can be found to the west, 
including the General Store, the Temple Shop and the Alchemy Shop. 
These are three shops you should visit at the beginning of every new 
game, as they sell very useful items you will need on your adventures.

The first time you are in town it will be daytime (unless you are 
playing an undead race who starts at night), but note that the sun 
rises and falls as time passes; if you enter the town at night, the 
town will be dark. Fortunately for you, the various shops and the other 
special buildings are open on a 24-hour basis.

Townspeople

The shopkeepers are not the town's only inhabitants - you will likely 
also see some people on the streets. There are the street urchins, 
young children who will mob an adventurer for money, and seem to come 
out of the woodwork when excited. Blubbering idiots are a constant 
annoyance, but not harmful. Public drunks wander about the town 
singing, and are of no threat to anyone. Sneaky rogues who work for the 
black market are always greedily eyeing your backpack for potential new 
'purchases'... And what town would be complete without a swarm of half 
drunk warriors, who take offense or become annoyed just for the fun of 
it? Finally, stories told in hushed tones on dark nights speak of the 
mythical Nick, the butcher; although whether he really is a 
bloodthirsty destroyer of worlds remains for you to determine.

These townspeople are in fact some of the first monsters you will meet 
during your adventure, and some of them should be avoided by the 
largest possible distance as you wander from store to store. Fights 
will break out, though, so be prepared. Since your character grew up in 
this world of intrigue, no experience is awarded for killing the town 
inhabitants, though you may acquire treasure.

One word of warning: occasionally a creature who normally would inhabit 
only the wilderness and dungeons may wander into the town. These should 
generally be handled with much more caution than ordinary townspeople. 
But they do give experience, so there's that!

Shopping in Town

Your character will begin his adventure with a few basic items, plus 
some gold with which to purchase additional supplies. Just pick the 
store you wish to visit and walk over to the entrance, and you can shop 
to your heart's content (or until you run out of money, whichever comes 
first). See [b] for the shopping interface help.

Stores do not always have everything in stock. As the game progresses, 
stores acquire new items, so check again from time to time to see if 
they've got something new you might like. But the opposite also happens 
- items get sold to other customers, often just when you had finally 
acquired enough money to buy them with. To prevent this from happening, 
you can reserve an item you have your eyes on but can't quite afford; 
but reserving is itself quite expensive, so be sure you really do want 
that item.

Note that new store inventory will not be added while you are in town, 
even if you save the game and return. You must spend time in the 
dungeon and do some adventuring if you wish the store owner to clear 
out his stock and acquire new items. If you have a lot of spare gold, 
you can either pay the shopkeeper to restock (this is called shop 
shuffling) or simply buy out the store's entire inventory; a buyout 
will induce the store owner to bring out new stock, though occasionally 
he might just retire on your money and sell the shop to a new owner.

Store owners will not buy harmful or useless items. If an object is 
unidentified, they will pay you some base price for it. Having bought 
an object, they will immediately fully identify it. If it is a good 
object, they will add it to their inventory; if it was a bad bargain, 
they simply throw the item away. In either case, you will receive some 
knowledge of the item that will help you identify similar objects in 
the future. That's cold comfort if it turns out you sold a great item 
for a pittance, but does mean the benefits of selling are not purely 
monetary. Players who turn on the no selling birth option ([c]) 
sometimes "sell" an item for nothing just to have it fully identified.

Object Pricing

Each object has a nominal base value, sometimes called the item score, 
which is computed based on the quality of the object. Item score is the 
most important factor in determining the price for which the object can 
be bought and sold. Inspecting an inventory item (or examining a shop 
item) will display its score, though if the item has not yet been fully 
identified, the score shown may be an inaccurate estimate.

You cannot just buy and sell items for this nominal value, though; 
shopkeepers will charge you extra when you buy, and pay you less when 
you sell. How bad this effect is depends on several factors: your 
charisma, fame, and race, and the shopkeeper's race and greediness. 
Each shopkeeper also has an individual selling cap: the maximum amount 
they will ever pay for a single item.

Shopkeepers like charismatic players, and will pay them more and charge 
them less. Famous players are also treated favorably in the towns; but 
new adventurers are a dime a dozen, and make ready marks for store 
owners. The average shopkeeper has little respect for pretentious, 
know-it-all upstarts who think they can just buy a lantern and go kill 
Morgoth. Pshaw!

Your race, and the shopkeeper's race, also affect pricing. Your race 
can make shopkeepers less friendly, even if you have high charisma 
(shopkeepers are quite distressed whenever a Balrog enters their 
shop!), and can affect pricing significantly. The shopkeeper's race is 
not as important, but it helps a bit if you and the shopkeeper belong 
to the same race.

The final factor affecting pricing is the shopkeeper's greediness, 
which is not explicitly displayed but can be inferred from the results. 
Black Market operators are all extremely greedy and tend to set 
extortionate prices.

List of Shops

  The General Store (1)
  The General Store sells foods, drinks, some clothing, torches, lamps, 
  oil, shovels, picks, capture balls, and iron spikes. All of these 
  items and some others can be sold back to the General store for 
  money.

  The Armory ()
  The Armory is where the town's armor is fashioned. All sorts of 
  protective gear may be bought and sold here.

  The Weaponsmith's Shop (3)
  The Weaponsmith's Shop is where the town's weapons are fashioned. 
  Hand and missile weapons may be purchased and sold here, along with 
  arrows, bolts, and shots.

  The Temple Shop (4)
  The Temple Shop deals in healing and restoration potions, as well as 
  bless scrolls, word of recall scrolls, some approved priestly 
  weapons, as well as books of Life magic for priests and paladins.

  The Alchemy Shop (5)
  The Alchemy Shop deals in all types of potions and scrolls.

  The Magic Shop (6)
  The Magic Shop deals in all sorts of rings, wands, amulets, and 
  staves, as well as some magic books.

  The Black Market (7)
  The Black Market will sell and buy anything at extortionate prices. 
  However, it occasionally has VERY good items in it. The shopkeepers 
  are not known for their tolerance...

  Your Home (8)
  This is your house where you can store objects that you cannot carry 
  on your travels, or will need at a later date. See [d] for more 
  information.

  The Bookstore (9)
  The Bookstore deals in all sorts of magical books. You can purchase 
  and sell spellbooks for the spellcasters here.

  The Shroomery (0)
  The Shroomery sells many useful basic mushrooms, including the 
  always-handy Cure Poison, Cure Confusion and Fast Recovery.

  The Museum (M)
  This is a place where you can donate objects, which will then be put 
  on permanent display. There is no gameplay advantage to using the 
  Museum; it is simply for storing memories. See [e] for more 
  information.

Special Buildings

In addition to the shops, all towns have some special buildings with 
custom services. The buildings vary from town to town significantly, 
both in terms of their name and the services that they offer, but a few 
of the most common or important ones are listed below:

  Inns (+)
  
  Inns are places where the player may obtain food, rest for the night, 
  relax and listen to the latest rumours, and (within limitations - see 
  [f] below) teleport to other inns. The inns in Outpost and Lite-Town 
  offer quests. Almost all towns have an inn.
  
  Castles (+)
  
  Nearly all towns have a building, usually a large and conspicuous 
  one, where the local ruler can be found. All rulers have some quests 
  for you to complete; Uldrik, the Count of Outpost, is also willing to 
  identify your items (for a reasonable fee, of course).
  
  Libraries (+)
  
  Librarians are experts in all kinds of lore, and will identify or 
  *Identify* your items in return for payment. The library in Lite-Town 
  also researches monsters, a function more commonly left for the local 
  Beastmaster.
  
  Temples (+)
  
  Many towns have a holy temple, usually connected to or in the 
  immediate vicinity of the Temple Shop. Temples provide healing and 
  restoration (as long as you pay offerings).
  
  Arena (+)
  
  There is only one Arena in the game (in either Thalos or Lite-Town). 
  The Arena is a special building where you may fight a single monster 
  at a time, for the entertainment of the townsfolk. During these 
  fights, you cannot use magical devices, read scrolls, quaff potions, 
  activate equipment or (usually) summon help. Winning an Arena fight 
  increases your fame (some enemies also drop fixed valuable items); 
  but losing a fight severely damages your fame and results in a ban 
  from further Arena fights. You cannot physically die in the Arena; 
  you will exit at 0 HP, with cuts and poisoning healed. Do be careful 
  not to die just outside the Arena, though...
  
  Gambling Dens (+)
  
  Casinos that may offer varied entertainment such as card games or 
  even betting on fights between monsters.
  
  Fighters' Halls (+)
  
  These buildings usually house a weaponsmith who is willing to enchant 
  your equipment for you... though how much work he's willing to put in 
  depends on your class and character level, and of course on how much 
  you pay. Some Fighters' Halls might also offer quests or reforging 
  (see [g]).

This list is far from exhaustive; there are many other buildings 
besides, with many services and quests on offer. Explore and find out!

Town Quests

At least one building in each town will offer your character the 
opportunity to undertake a quest. Such quests typically fall under the 
following categories: kill all monsters on the quest level (assume this 
to be the case if nothing else is stated), kill one or more monsters of 
a certain type (for example, kill Old Man Willow or kill 8 Wargs), or 
retrieve a certain object and escape from the quest level. Completing 
town quests is a key part of the game; you may eventually spend almost 
as much time in town quests as you do in dungeons.

When you request a quest, you will be given a brief description of the 
quest and your objective, as well as an indication of its danger level. 
For example, here we have just pressed q to request a quest from the 
Sultan of Thalos:


 Sultan Idris (Human)                              Palace

The Old Watchtower (Thalos) (Level 32): Unfortunately, the citizens of          
Thalos are still not safe. A young boy disappeared last week while out          
on a walk; we found his corpse in the forest a few days later, lifeless         
and sucked dry of blood. The city's lawyers, afraid of being blamed by          
the public, are pressuring me to drive out the vampires who have taken          
over the old watchtower near the shore. Please help me eliminate the            
vampires, you will be well rewarded.                                            
                                                                                
 q) Request quest                                                               
                                                                                
 ESC) Exit building                                  Gold Remaining: 27.8k


Most town quests take place on special town quest levels, which can be 
accessed from the town or its immediate vicinity. Quest entrances are 
indicated on the map with the symbol >, and will appear at the top of 
the ] object list, making them easy to spot. You do not have to take 
them immediately; feel free to delay the quest until you are confident 
in your ability to succeed. Press Ctrl-Q every once in a while to check 
your quest history, which includes an ordered list of uncompleted 
quests; this will make sure you won't forget to complete them.

Rarely, you will be assigned a dungeon quest; instead of a special 
quest level, these quests occur on normal dungeon levels. See [h] for 
more information on dungeon quests.

Having completed a quest (of either type), return to the person who 
assigned you the quest and press q again; you will get warm thanks and 
(usually) a nice reward for your good work. You can also then request a 
new quest! But if you leave a quest level before completing the quest, 
you have irreparably failed it; your fame is reduced, and you miss out 
on the reward.

Quest lines are semi-fixed; you will mostly receive the same quests 
from the same buildings in every game, but there is some randomness in 
the list of quests. The special town quest levels' layouts are likewise 
semi-fixed; the terrain is usually the same or mostly the same every 
game, the objects are usually different or mostly different, and the 
monsters may or may not be the same depending on the quest. Finally, 
the rewards are semi-fixed; some are more random than others, and many 
(though not all) are tailored to the specific needs of your race and 
class. Having seen a quest before is a large practical advantage, but 
do not assume everything will be exactly the same.

    Note: Town quest levels obey a few special rules. In 
    particular, you cannot use Genocide, Mass Genocide, 
    Annihilation, Destruction, Earthquake or Teleport Level 
    inside a quest.

You should also not assume that you can teleport everywhere within a 
quest level; usually you can, but some quests have secure areas with 
invisible anti-teleportation fields. You can teleport out of these 
areas, but not in.

The Wilderness Option

Outside the (relative) safety of Outpost lies a large and diverse 
wilderness, where many towns and dungeons await you. Unfortunately, it 
is also home to many dangerous creatures, and the distance between 
where you are and where you want to go is often vast. It is therefore a 
good idea to use the scaled global map (also known as the overworld) 
for travelling in the wilderness.

    The Global Map: Press < to enter the global map for 
    wilderness travel, and > to return to the normal map 
    once you have reached your destination.

You are in Outpost [q,p,o,x,j,+,-,?,<dir>] L0
     #~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.......#........>...................>.#~# LEVEL      1
     #~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.......#..............................~~# EXP       16
     #~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~....#...#...................###.......~## AU       595
     #~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.....#..##...................###......~~# |       (   
     #~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~......####..................#.#........~~ STR :     16
     #~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~....#####>................>.............. INT :     14
     #~~~...~~~~~~~~~~......####................................... WIS :      8
     #~~............~~...~....................................~~... DEX :  18/50
     #~...>.............~~..................................~~~~... CON :     17
     #~................~~~~.......~~~......................~~~~~... CHR :     12
     #~..........##....~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..............*.....~~~~~.... AC        15
     #~.........####.#..~~~~~~.....~~~~~~~~~~~.~~~......~~.......#. HP   37/  37
     #~........##~~##....~~~~....@...~~~~~~~~..~~~~~.........######             
     #~~........~~>##....~~~...#......~~~~........~~>~~~###########             
     #~~~.......~~~##.#..~~..###.......~~...........~~~~~##########             
     #~~~~~.......##.#.~~~..###..............####....~~############             
     #~~~~###....##.#..~~~...............#########...~#############             
     #~~~###..#......#..~~...............#########..~~#############             
     #~~####.###..#.....~~...............######>####.~#############             
     #~#####>#~~...#.....~.................#########.~~############             
     #~~####~~~~~........~~~.......~~~~~~...#######..~~~###########             
     #~~###~~~~~~......~~~~~~....~~~~~~~~~~~~.........~~~##########             
     #~~###~~~~~~......~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~..~~~~~~~~#######             
     #~######~~~.....~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~             
     #~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~             
Surface

As displayed on the global map, the wilderness consists of a 97x62 tile 
world; each tile corresponds to an area the size of a max-sized dungeon 
level on the regular map, and contains themed terrain such as forests, 
mountains or plains. A number of towns exist in various parts of the 
world, each situated on their own wilderness tile. Two of these towns 
are visible in the screenshot above: Outpost, where you start (actually 
that one's hidden by the @, which is us!) and Morivant, represented by 
the * to the east. Many (too many?) dungeon entrances can also be seen, 
each represented by the familiar > symbol. In the top-right corner of 
the screenshot, northeast of Morivant, you can just see the dread 
dungeon of Angband; it is home to the Serpent of Chaos, whom you must 
kill in order to win the game.

Travelling through the overworld is both faster and safer than using 
the normal map, but the wilderness is still inhabited and dangerous 
monsters still lurk in wait. The unwary adventurer might suddenly walk 
into an ambush, and be forced back onto the normal map; in such a 
situation, you cannot simply run away by using the < key again, but 
might try escaping with a scroll of Teleport.

There are several ways to improve your odds against being ambushed. Try 
to stay on the roads as much as possible; they are not completely safe, 
but far less dangerous than travelling off the beaten path, and if you 
do get ambushed there the surroundings will likely not be as deadly. 
Stealthy characters (and very powerful characters) are less likely to 
be ambushed. In addition, travelling is safer during the daytime.

You can use the l look command to see the danger level of a wilderness 
tile. As the L0 on the screenshot above shows, Outpost is located on a 
level 0 tile! Some types of terrain, like lava fields or deep oceans, 
are almost invariably very dangerous and best avoided until your 
character is a bit stronger.

Discovering and Entering Dungeons

A few of the dungeons are easy to find and enter - they are accessible 
from towns. You even start the game on the entrance to one such 
dungeon, Warrens. These town dungeons are also some of the least 
dangerous dungeons, which makes sense - who would build a town or live 
there if the entrance to Hell was next door? Okay, so that's not too 
bad a description of the no-wilderness town...

The vast majority of dungeons, though, can only be reached through the 
wilderness. It is best to travel there through the global map; but 
dungeons cannot be actually entered from the global map, only from the 
regular map, so you'll have to switch back as you reach the right tile. 
As you do this, a problem sometimes becomes apparent: because one tile 
on the scaled global map corresponds to a fairly large area on the 
normal map, there is no guarantee you will find yourself immediately 
next to the actual entrance. The entrance might be some way away, maybe 
even out of sight (in such a situation the game will helpfully tell you 
which direction the entrance is in). Take the direction indicated, and 
use the ] object/feature list command regularly; it will often spot the 
entrance before its actual appearance on the screen.

There is another obstacle you may encounter before reaching the 
dungeon. Many dungeons have an entrance guardian - a monster sitting on 
top of the entrance who will refuse to budge until you have killed it. 
Entrance guardians are also immune to being teleported, so that is not 
an easy way out! Sometimes it is possible to dodge an entrance guardian 
and reach the stairs despite its watchful eye, but most of the time you 
will have to kill it. In general, low-level dungeons have no entrance 
guardians while high-level dungeons do have one; some of them, like the 
Ethereal Dragon on the Crystal Castle entrance, can be very dangerous.

Occasionally, you will find dungeon entrances in places where you did 
not expect any. These are random one-level dungeons - they are often 
dangerous, but can have exceptional items within. Random dungeons 
sometimes generate quite close to regular dungeons; especially in the 
deep oceans, where random dungeons are fairly common, you might have to 
double-check that the entrance you found is actually the one you were 
looking for. (You can use the look command or the * targetting command 
for this.)

Having finally reached the entrance - hopefully the right one - just 
press > and you're inside. After that, you'll never have to take this 
particular wilderness trip again: you have automatically established a 
recall point in the dungeon, and can return there by Word of Recall any 
time you wish.

See [i] for what to expect in the dungeon.

Which Dungeons Should I Visit?

There are three main reasons you might wish to visit a dungeon - to 
complete a quest there, to kill the final guardian (or boss) who 
inhabits the last level of the dungeon, or simply to gather some 
experience and loot. The last of these can of course be done in any 
dungeon, but sometimes you might feel a particular dungeon is just 
really comfortable for your character and playstyle.

The first time you play, you won't really know who the bosses are (or 
which depths they inhabit), and you probably haven't received many 
dungeon quests yet, maybe just the very early Pest Control quest (see 
[j]). So it is a sensible idea to just do the town dungeons first, and 
then peek into the others in order of the depth they start at, since 
that's what looking at a dungeon reveals. For example, after completing 
Warrens, Hideout and the Icky Cave (and a few town quests), you might 
wish to enter the Tidal Cave, Orc Cave, Labyrinth and Camelot next.

The Angband dungeon is a bit special in that it starts at a very low 
level - level 1 - but the boss (that would be the Serpent of Chaos!) - 
is all the way down on level 100. Also, Angband uniquely has a number 
of random quests strewn throughout, often with good rewards for 
completion. This makes it hard to know when you should enter Angband. 
Some players go there very early for the quests; others may postpone it 
for a long time, or even use magical methods to skip most of the 
dungeon altogether.

Once you have done enough descending into a dungeon, you might be 
informed you have located the dungeon's boss:

    You enter a maze of down staircases. Mughash the Kobold Lord lives 
    on this level as the keeper of Warrens.

Killing bosses is fun (and rewarding), but it can also be dangerous, 
especially when you are playing for the first time and don't really 
know what the bosses do. To improve your knowledge, you can pay your 
local Beastmaster (most but not all towns have one) to research the 
boss for you; this will reveal you everything about them, and allows 
you to prepare and make an informed decision as to whether you are 
ready to take them on. Pay particular attention to whether the boss 
resists confusion - some bosses are seemingly very tough for their 
depth, but if they do not resist confusion, that's an opening for you. 
Though some of the higher-level bosses (like Utgard-Loke) seem to shake 
confusion off suspiciously quickly...

Sometimes you can just jump from dungeon to dungeon, killing the bottom 
guardians and leaving a trail of universal destruction in your wake. At 
other times you may have to prepare a bit, in town quests or on the 
lower levels of dungeons. In the early mid-game, this might happen in 
Lonely Mountain - players often find it a good dungeon to set up camp 
in for a while, since the terrain is usually relatively favorable and 
the presence of many dragons means that treasures are also abundant. 
Note though that the Lonely Mountain is, well, a mountain, and very 
difficult to enter for the first time unless you have levitation.

The big takeaway here should be that there is no single right order to 
do the dungeons in. Some people like to dive into very deep dungeons 
really early, and the entrance guardians be damned! Experiment a bit; 
find out what works for you, which bosses you find easy to handle, and 
which dungeons you really like. Sometimes you will be completing a 
whole dungeon in one go; at other times you may be hopping between 
several dungeons you're halfway into, or repeatedly recalling in and 
out of a single dungeon with no intention of fighting the boss.

See [k] for a list of dungeons.

Travelling Between Towns

A network of roads connects most of the towns, providing the best and 
simplest way to reach them (at least for the first time). Again, use 
the global map. Stick to the roads as much as you can; sometimes it is 
tempting to take a shortcut through the wild, but this increases the 
chance of a dangerous ambush.

As with dungeons, you only need to really take these wilderness trips 
once. A teleportation grid connects the inns of the towns, and you can 
use it (for a reasonable fee) to jump from town to town. The tavern 
keepers, being businessmen, want your money... but they also want their 
customers alive, and won't send you into another town without knowing 
you can handle the new environment. But once you have proved this by 
reaching the town on foot, you can return there by teleport at any 
time. There is one exception to this rule: the town of Thalos lies in 
the middle of a dangerous ocean, and the innkeepers have no wish to 
lose a customer by sending them there on foot. So, you are allowed to 
teleport there as soon as you have reached any town besides Outpost. 
(It is rumoured that one of the towns may have been cut off from the 
teleportation grid by strange disturbances in the space-time 
continuum... Perhaps you can do something about that?)

Once you have enough money to afford it comfortably, you will find 
yourself teleporting between the towns regularly. All have quests to 
complete, and shops to visit - and somehow, your home has its full 
inventory in every town, so that's handy!

The No Wilderness Option

Diverse dungeons are fun, multiple towns are fun, and the wilderness is 
fun; but sometimes you might want to just forget about them all and 
select the No Wilderness option. Maybe you are new to FrogComposband, 
and want to learn the basics in a simplified version of the game before 
moving on to the full version. (Beginner Mode automatically turns on 
coffee-break mode, which turns off the wilderness - though sometimes, 
enthusiastic new players jump straight to the Normal Mode!) Or maybe 
you are a long-term player who has already been everywhere, seen 
everything, and wants a quicker and more streamlined game experience 
for a change. Maybe you just really like coffee-break mode.

In no-wilderness play, there is only one town: Outpost. The 
no-wilderness version of Outpost is somewhat different from the 
wilderness Outpost and is sometimes referred to as lite-town, although 
it actually has a lot more stuff in it than the regular version does. 
With wilderness on, Outpost is a very basic and simple town; it has the 
shops, the inn, the castle, but to find exciting special buildings you 
have to travel elsewhere. This is not the case with Lite-Town - there 
is no elsewhere to travel, so all the special buildings important to 
the game (and a few that are not so important) can be found in the 
single town. The number of quests available in Lite-Town is also much 
higher than in regular Outpost, though also much lower than in all the 
wilderness towns combined.

Here's a glimpse of this alternative Outpost - the Count's castle, the 
inn and most of the other buildings are in the same locations, but 
there are many additional buildings, and the dungeon entrance is within 
the walls.


~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~####.......####~~.......................... LEVEL      1
######################~~###############~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ EXP       15
######################~~.#############.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~#### AU       819
#...#..##...........##~~######+++######~~########################## |       (   
#..#.#..#.##.######.##~~#####.....#####~~########################## STR :     16
.#.#....#.##.######.##~~~~~.........~~~~~##.....................### INT :     18
..###.#.#.#+....#+#.###~~~~~~~...~~~~~~~~##.#########.#########.##~ WIS :      9
.#####..#.##........##########...##########.#########.#########.##~ DEX :  18/40
.#####.##............#########...#########..####2####.#########.##~ CON :     17
###4###.#....###...........###...###............................##~ CHR :     12
#+#.#+#.#...#####..................................######..####.##~ AC         6
........#...#####..................................###8##..3###.### HP   37/  37
###.#####....#+#.................@.....................##..####.### SP   14/  14
................................................................###             
...................................................................             
.............................##6##........##++####....###+####..###             
..........###...............#######......##########...########..###             
.........####>..............#######.....###....#####..########..##~             
####....#######.............#######.....+#......##+......#####..##~             
###1....#######..............#####......+#......##+......#####..##~             
####.....#####..............#######.....###....#####...#######..##~ Study (1)   
####......###...............+#####+......##########....#######..##~             
............................#######.......##++####..............##~             
####..##5##..#####+#####............................##.##7####..##~             
####.#######.##########9...............##0##.###.#####.#######..##~             
Outpost

Coffee-Break Mode

Coffee-break mode is a birth option you can select from the = options 
menu during character creation. Selecting Beginner Mode at the intro 
screen automatically turns coffee-break mode on, but coffee-break mode 
is also available in Normal Mode and in Monster Mode.

Coffee-break mode greatly accelerates experience gain in the dungeon 
(only the dungeon!), increases monster drops, improves their quality, 
and speeds up a number of less obvious game mechanics such as reforging 
and most forms of proficiency gain. Coffee-break mode also makes the 
game faster in other ways - it reduces early-game level size, turns all 
staircases into shafts, and disables all upstairs altogether. The only 
way you can go is down, and you will find yourself in the thick of the 
action very quickly! Coffee-break mode (unlike other forms of 
forced-descent play) does allow you to recall back to town, to shop and 
to complete town quests; you are also allowed to fail dungeon quests, 
although this causes you to permanently lose the special accelerated 
reforging bonus.

It is not possible to use coffee-break mode with the wilderness on. It 
is possible to play with both the wilderness and coffee-break mode off, 
but this is not recommended.

How to Cope in Coffee-Break Mode

Although coffee-break mode is turned on for beginners, it does not 
necessarily make the game easy. Sure, your character will gain in power 
very fast - but you also run into nasty enemies very fast! It is 
therefore best to have a plan.

One town quest is available to coffee-break players that many 
characters can complete before entering the dungeon - the Thieves' 
Hideout quest, offered by Count Uldrik. Completing this quest nets you 
several character levels, a reward from the Count, and a fair bit of 
money; you can now purchase better supplies, as well as request your 
next quest: Pest Control (the Warg Quest). This quest is in the 
dungeon, so you cannot delay going there any further - but killing the 
Wargs will give you quite a lot of experience, radically improving your 
chances when you meet the first random questor.

Random Questors

Random level guardians are both the greatest peril, and the greatest 
opportunity, that you will face early in a coffee-break game. Killing a 
random questor gives you a free stat-up, bonus exceptional items 
(beyond what they'd drop anyway!), and the warm feeling of making 
tangible progress.

On the other hand... the random level guardians are all out-of-depth 
uniques, and even with your accelerated power gain it is far from a 
given that you can kill them. Occasionally, you get very unlucky and 
the game hits you with a guardian who is simply way too tough for you. 
Players have often pulled off miraculous kills in these situations - 
desperation can come up with a strategy where a calmer mind would give 
up. But sometimes it is better to just accept your unfortunate fate and 
purposely fail the quest before you die or burn all your supplies in a 
futile attempt at completion. The penalties for failing a quest are 
rough (you can probably already forget your dream of reforging Ringil 
onto a ring); but at least you are alive.

Because you never know when you might meet a tough guardian, and cannot 
just recall home to get your supplies like you could in a wilderness 
game, it is best to be always prepared. Nothing is more annoying than 
making a heroic attempt at killing the guardian and narrowly failing 
because you had left one potion too many at home.

See [l] for the basics of how a random dungeon quest works.


Original   : (??)
Updated    : (??)
Updated    : Zangband DevTeam
Updated    : Hengband 1.0.11
Updated    : PosChengband 4.0.0
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.0.nougat
Updated    : FrogComposband 7.1.liquorice



