Changes in FrogComposband 7.0.nougat:

* Added two new races (Einheri and Werewolf). Einherjar are very 
powerful but only receive partial benefits from magical healing. 
Werewolves can (big surprise) assume either human or wolf shape, with 
both shapes having their strengths and weaknesses (thanks to murphy and 
CyclopsSlayer for their pre-release werewolf feedback)

* Slowing is no longer a purely binary status (either no slowing or -10 
to speed); while the binary slowing still exists, some forms of slowing 
are now incremental and can take any value between no slowing and -10. 
The two forms of slowing partially add together, so a player (or 
monster) afflicted with both forms can be slowed by up to -12 in total
(thanks to Derakon for this idea)

* Shuffled some of the buildings in Anambar to reduce travel distances 
(the shroomery/black market building and the archery guild building 
switched places; the library is now in the formerly empty building 
southwest of the main square, the beastmaster is now where the library 
was, and the former beastmaster building is now empty)

* Added more Egyptian gods, and a new dungeon they now inhabit. Added a 
new birth option (single_pantheon) to play with only one of the two 
pantheons currently in the game (Greek or Egyptian); selecting this 
option will remove the other pantheon, and its associated dungeon, from 
the game

* Added new monsters and artifacts

* Added one new demigod power (Inspired Smithing, which improves 
reforge results) and several new mutations (adapted from Frogspawn)

* Coffee-break mode's modified level size algorithm is now always used 
in the Angband dungeon (except in the case of games with 
ironman_downward on and coffee_break off). Generally, this means 
smaller levels in the early game

* Beginner mode now uses the coffee_break option

* Friendly monsters no longer trigger the Eldritch Horror sanity-blast

* Replaced potions of resist electricity with potions of vigor, which 
cure all temporary slowing effects (both binary and incremental) plus 
stunning. (Potions of life now also cure all temporary slowing effects, 
and potions of healing and *healing* and rods of angelic healing reduce 
incremental slowing by 1)

* Fixed a bug that allowed alchemists to receive special benefits from 
some potions just by inspecting them (thanks to TauzentBlitz for 
reporting this)

* A list of allied uniques is now shown in the character sheet for 
classes who can permanently befriend a monster (currently, just 
politicians)

* The player's life rating (if known) is now shown in the character 
sheet (at the bottom of the Statistics section)

* Tweaked item valuation again (items with high-pval weaponmastery are 
now worth more)

* Coffee-break mode's max reforge power bonus (accelerated reforging) 
is now permanently reduced if the character fails any of the random 
Angband quests

* Buffed the Fell Sorcery and One with Magic demigod powers. The effect 
of Fell Sorcery on spell power was doubled. One with Magic now 
successfully resists dispelling and anti-magic 77% of the time instead 
of the old 50%, unless the player is mimicking or in wraithform (the 
mimicking restriction does not apply to doppelgangers)

* Added a new scroll (Scroll of Inventory Protection). Unlike other 
sources of temporary inventory protection (which only reduce the 
chances of item damage), the scrolls provide complete protection

* Improved item parsing. It is now possible to specify an ego device, 
as well as to specify a pile size, and specified devices are no longer 
necessarily generated at the lowest level supported by the effect. Some 
of the quest device rewards are now ego

* Fixed a bug that caused the Identify spell to not work properly for 
Ring player-monsters (thanks to TauzentBlitz for reporting this). Also 
changed the default point allocation for Rings per TauzentBlitz's 
suggestion

* The show_discovery and always_dump_origins options are now on by 
default due to their popularity

* An item's weight is now displayed when the item is examined (thanks 
to Mocht for reminding me of this)

* The proficiency screen didn't display proper statistics for player 
death scythes; this has been fixed (thanks to Nivim for reporting this)

* "Cursed" status was not updated properly if the curse was broken by 
an enchantment; this has been fixed

* Monsters can no longer tele-level the player out of dungeon quest 
levels (in the case of fixed quests this caused an automatic quest 
failure, which was highly annoying and somewhat unfair) (thanks to 
Bucephalus for bringing this up)

* Item quests could become uncompletable for Death-Swords and 
Weaponsmiths if they absorbed the item without picking it up first; 
this has been fixed (thanks to Prandar for reporting this)

* Some *vorpal* weapons had misleading inscriptions due to lacking the 
VORPAL flag; this has been fixed (thanks to Nivim for reporting this)

* Monsters with long (2-square) melee were not able to use it 
diagonally; this has been fixed

* Shield weaponmasters were not allowed to use mithril shields; this 
has been fixed (thanks to Bucephalus for reporting this)

* One of the Trump Shuffle effects ("picture of a strange monster") 
didn't work properly due to an old bug (thanks to bostock for reporting 
this)

* Coffee-break mode inappropriately created normal down stairs instead 
of a shaft to connect random dungeon quests on consecutive levels; this 
has been fixed

* Improved valuation of unidentified items, and fixed a longstanding 
bug that allowed unidentified good, awful and average items to receive 
a value bonus intended only for artifacts

* Failed attempts to close a door while confused now take some time 
(although less than a full turn)

* Improved support for Adam Bolt's tiles by copying things from 
ZAngband

* Disease attacks can now cause temporary unwellness

* Explosions can now have multiple effects (e.g. Internet Exploders now 
slow the player a bit in addition to the time damage)

* The location of permanent features (like stairs or permanent walls) 
is no longer forgotten by the player after earthquakes or destruction

* Tweaked the Mauler class. Their Close In spell can now be cancelled 
during targetting without HP or energy loss (thanks to Mocht for that 
suggestion), but their melee power, archery skills and life rating were 
reduced a bit. (Don't worry - they still do silly damage with the right 
weapons...)

* Made psions a little less overpowered

* Slightly lowered weaponsmiths' life rating

* Tweaked repeated targetting a bit. A new target is now always 
requested if the old target was the player's mount, and also if the 
player targetted himself and has moved since. Not cancelling the old 
targets in these cases sometimes caused unexpected behavior, especially 
with the use_old_target option on (thanks to FlauterFiddle for bringing 
this up)

* The Enchant Weapon and Enchant Armor object selection menus no longer 
allow futile attempts to enchant items with the NO_ENCHANT flag (thanks 
to murphy for suggesting this)

* Vortex player-monsters now have a race boss (Wiruin)

* Slightly reduced the power of melee slays and brands
(Gwarl's weapon die buff in ComPosband effectively made slays and 
brands more powerful than they used to be, since their power depends on 
dice; so for most weapons, the power of slays and brands now is fairly 
similar to what it was in PosChengband before Gwarl's weapon buff)

* Fixed a number of bugs with melee slays and brands. (Most notably, 
Slay *Living* didn't work properly [it had the same effect as normal 
Slay Living])

* In some unusual cases, a single monster could be counted as a kill 
for quest completion purposes more than once. In general, any player 
strong enough to take "advantage" of this was better off just 
curbstomping the quest the normal way, but the loopholes have been 
plugged anyway

* Attempts to revive a quest target monster will now always fail

* Oremorj the Cyberdemon Lord now has fewer hitpoints, but can 
sometimes recover from confusion speedily

* Elder storm giants now resist confusion

* Sleeping in the inn or reforging an item now resets all timed flags

* Nerfed the Sorcery Realm's Mass Stasis spell, which now has much 
lower power and shorter duration if effective (it's still one of the 
best spells in that realm...) Some other stasis/paralysing effects also 
have shorter duration now

* The Confusing Lights spell is now slightly weaker (staves of 
Confusing Lights are not affected by this change)

* Teleport Level and Word of Recall now request confirmation if the 
player is about to recall/teleport out of a quest that cannot be 
retaken

* Retaking level 99 or 100 in coffee-break mode now slightly increases 
the Serpent's mpower

* Body armour of Celestial Protection sometimes has additional buffs 
now, especially at high levels

* The "You have no artifacts to reforge" error message now displays the 
reforge power limit (thanks to bostock for suggesting this)

* Plugged wobbly's Black Market potion reserving exploit

* Androids can now use the Eat command (in addition to the old Quaff 
command) to consume a flask of oil (thanks to Mocht and bostock for 
suggesting this)

* Made selling caps in key shops (armoury and weapon shop) friendlier 
to the player, and removed some duplication in the shopkeeper list

* Slightly reduced the cost of reforging in coffee-break mode to 
compensate for the more limited money supply

* Monsters summoned by Amberite blood curses now appear with more 
energy needed, and therefore won't insta-kill the player unless the 
player is paralyzed or has low speed

* The Enchantment spell (available to mariliths and dragons, and as an 
activation on the hammer of Hephaestus) now applies the usual 99% 
discount to enchanted non-ego items (thanks to Bucephalus for 
suggesting this)

* Ultra-powerful items from normally low-weight slots whose score 
exceeds the reforge power cap of their native slot (e.g. Nenya or 
Vilya) can now have the power cap of the destination slot applied to 
them if reforged into a higher-weight slot

* Added a new disturbance option ("Run past buried treasure"; on by 
default)

* Experience from a monster kill is now reduced if 100 or more monsters 
of that race have been killed. (Copied from Frogspawn; replaces the 
previous exp reduction formula that only applied to breeders and kicked 
in after 400 kills)

* The Mogaminator now accepts "icky" as an adjective (so "!icky" means 
"destroy all icky items", and "!nameless icky weapons" means "destroy 
all icky melee weapons that aren't ego or artifact"). The Mogaminator 
defines icky items as either weapons that trigger icky wield, or gloves 
that trigger encumbrance. It is possible that the "icky" keyword 
doesn't work correctly for some classes yet; any such reports will be 
appreciated (thanks to BobZero for this suggestion)

* Added an option to deactivate the Mogaminator (thanks to BobZero for 
this suggestion)

* It is now possible to inscribe a weapon with !? to request 
confirmation of melee attacks, preventing accidental melee (this may be 
desirable for pure magic users, or in the case of temporarily wielded 
objects like shovels). The inscription may also include a monster level 
(e.g. !?45 asks the player to confirm attacks against monsters of level 
45 or above, but not against monsters of level 44 or below). Once an 
attack against a monster has been confirmed, all further attacks 
against that monster are automatically assumed to be acceptable. 
Consecutive attacks against monsters of the same race are also assumed 
to be intentional; for example, if the player confirms an attack 
against an olog, all further attacks against ologs will be 
automatically confirmed until the player attacks a monster who is not 
an olog. Only the player's primary weapon is checked for the !? 
inscription (thanks to BobZero for this suggestion)

* A -more- prompt is now given to alert the player whenever a device or 
any inscribed item in the player's inventory is stolen or destroyed. 
These warnings can be turned off in the disturbance options
(thanks to kt for this suggestion)

* Implemented some of bostock's suggested alchemist improvements:
- Alchemists can now use the same infusion repeatedly with the 'n' 
command
- The Break Down and Create Infusion operations quantity prompts now 
default to the whole stack
- Infusions of Booze now warn the player on attempts to use them
- Potions with special super-effects for alchemists now have different 
descriptions when inspected by an alchemist
- An infusion-browsing function existed but could not be accessed 
in-game

* Alchemist infusions are now only almost weightless, not totally 
weightless (they weigh 0.05 lbs each, one-tenth of a potion's weight)

* Requesting a new quest with the previous quest's reward waiting 
outside no longer results in the permanent loss of the previous reward. 
(Note that it is *only* quest rewards that aren't lost - any other 
objects you may have left waiting outside will still be lost.)

* Added more random ring artifact names

* Updated some of the help files

* Various minor tweaks and code improvements

-------------------------------------------------------

Changes in FrogComposband 7.0.mango:

* Introduced three new personalities (Chaotic, Mundane and Unlucky) and 
restored the removed Lazy and Munchkin personalities. (Thanks to MITZE 
for suggesting the Chaotic personality and helping me devise it)

* Adapted the Alchemist class from PosChengband-R

* Adapted the Politician class from Frogspawn

* Restored the special Lazy artifacts (with some tweaks)

* Improved wilderness design (borders between different types of 
terrain are now less ugly - say goodbye to rectangular oceans)

* Adapted PosChengband-R's coffee-break mode (optional accelerated 
game) [faster exp gain and loot, no wilderness, forced descent but 
recall allowed] [it is currently possible to do DL99 and/or DL100 
repeatedly]

* The Craven personality now gives vulnerability to fear, but also a 
moderate quick walk (thanks to MITZE for this suggestion)

* Toned down chaos patron punishments - they happen less often now, and 
are less insta-killy (it should now be impossible for a punishment to 
insta-kill a fully healthy player outright, although they can still 
kill a player who was already hurt, and TY_CURSE is still a possibility 
at high levels)

* Spellcasting monsters can now use spells in response to being hurt by 
the player, even if the player is not in their line of sight or within 
range of their splash attacks. This makes it harder to kill drujs or 
quylthulgs safely by abusing line of sight (adapted from Frogspawn)

* Tweaked randart creation (bows are now more likely to have 
slays/brands or a miscellaneous attribute; instead of 
disproportionately generating randart armors with to-AC of exactly +20 
or weapons with to-hit/dam of exactly +25,+25, the bonuses are now 
somewhat more random)

* Tweaked item valuation (some resists are now worth a bit more, others 
are now worth a bit less, and items with many high resists are worth a 
bit more in general. Also, off-weapon slays were not properly valued, 
while off-weapon brands are now somewhat less valuable)

* Made the Crow's Nest quest saner; it would previously give either 
heaps of good objects or very few good objects, now it's guaranteed to 
have a moderate amount of them

* Made the Orc Camp and Tidy the Laboratory quests more compact

* Prevented the player from getting quite so many level-ups from Shadow 
Fairies and Tidy the Laboratory

* Added some new class-specific quest rewards (no, not for Sand Pit)

* The default reward for Orc Camp is now a staff of enlightenment

* Uniques and monster groups should no longer generate in Trouble at 
Home

* Due to an oversight, being poly_selfed with no_scrambling on could 
have extremely bad, potentially lethal consequences; this has been 
fixed

* The names and descriptions of random (or reforged) artifacts based on 
a standard artifact with the FULL_NAME flag will no longer be mangled

* Fixed an old bug that sometimes caused staves of cure wounds to 
appear as staves of healing (or vice versa) in the character sheet's 
Statistics section

* Fixed some serious bugs in the old code intended to prevent pets from 
killing the player with friendly fire. (Also, this code now applies to 
friendly monsters as well as pets; this is only fair, given what 
happens when the player's spells cause collateral damage to friendly 
monsters... Monsters with the "stupid" flag are an exception to this.)

* Fixed an old bug that caused quest monsters with escorts to not be 
correctly marked as questors, making them not reappear if destructed

* Fixed a bug that caused ninja-lawyers to be encumbered by any armor 
at all, effectively lowering their max SP (thanks to OmniNegro for 
reporting this)

* Fixed an old bug with rings and death-swords absorbing stacks of 
identical items (thanks to OmniNegro for reporting this)

* Fixed an old bug with teleporting mounts (thanks to TauzentBlitz for 
reporting this)

* Fixed an old bug that caused attacks by beholders on other monsters 
to be treated as attacks by the player (resulting in bizarre messages 
and damage, giving the player free experience, and allowing beholders 
to kill uniques). Also fixed a similar but unrelated bug that sometimes 
caused the message "You invoke Anti-Magic" to appear when a monster 
invoked it

* Fixed an old bug that caused listed skeleton rewards and actual 
skeleton rewards to be out of sync (thanks to the person who reported 
this bug. Unfortunately I forgot to note who it was)

* Fixed a minor bug with doppelgangers (they could gain a demigod power 
if they levelled up in barbarian or dunadan form, but could only access 
those powers normally in human or demigod form). Doppelganger 
barbarians and dunedain no longer receive demigod powers on level-up

* Fixed two old issues with possessors receiving monster lore on 
possessing a corpse. The first issue was that if the player never saw 
the monster alive, it would not count as seen, and would be ignored by 
the knowledge menu. (All possessed monsters are now marked as seen.) 
The second issue was that deprecated monsters were sometimes 
inappropriately generated (this should no longer happen), and they were 
also ignored by the knowledge menu. (Thanks to robinhood for reporting 
this)

* It is no longer possible to get unlimited hits against a monster by 
letting it stair-follow the player repeatedly (thanks to Gwarl for 
reporting this exploit)

* The use_old_target option no longer allows the player to ignore 
confusion while targetting (thanks to bostock for reporting this 
exploit)

* Plugged an old exploit that allowed weaponsmiths to permanently 
remove slaying penalties from heavy body armor, cloaks of the bat etc. 
by adding a token amount of Slaying essence to the item and then 
removing that (there are some very specific circumstances in which this 
exploit can still work, but the advantage gained should be minuscule 
compared to before)

* Monsters not currently visible are now always displayed as white in 
the monster health bar, unless enhanced telepathy is used. This 
prevents the health bar from accidentally revealing a monster's 
identity (thanks to vertigo for reminding me of this)

* High-level adversaries in the Thalos Arena no longer drop gold 
(thanks to Mocht for pointing out that they did)

* Standard artifacts received as quest rewards were not marked as 
"found", which caused the artifact counter in the character sheet to 
not notice them, though the bug did not allow them to be actually 
generated repeatedly (thanks to Mocht for reporting this)

* Fixed a minor bug that caused the message "You have found something!" 
to sometimes be displayed on rubble clearing even if nothing was 
actually found (thanks to Mocht for reporting this). Also, tweaked item 
generation in rubble (previously, items could only be found in 
low-level rubble. Now there's a small chance of finding items in 
high-level rubble too, but spamming for rubble items is harder)

* It is now possible to use the 'J' key to auto-travel to an 
object-list or monster-list entry. (This was already possible with the 
'`' key, but that option doesn't give full compatibility with 
non-English keyboards)

* Level 10 of Icky Cave is now guaranteed to be small or smallish

* All staircases generated in the Battlefield dungeon will now be 
shafts

* Tourists can now sell photographs for loose change at the 
Journalists' Guild in Anambar

* Improved gray-mages' spell UI

* Improved weapon proficiency display (it is now possible to see the 
class-specific proficiency caps for each weapon in-game, and to view 
the player's current proficiency as a percentage of either full mastery 
or the class-specific cap)

* Characters with levitation are no longer unable to deliberately jump 
into trap doors

* Scrolls will now ask for confirmation if reading them would have no 
effect (e.g. Teleport Level or Genocide inside a quest)

* Scrolls of Crafting now cancel outright if reading them is guaranteed 
to not have an effect (however, in cases where reading them might have 
an effect but doesn't, they still get used up like before)

* Nazguls are now immune to polymorphing

* Made wands of tsunami slightly less overpowered

* The weapon shop now stocks projectiles and quivers more often during 
the very early game (thanks to CyclopsSlayer for bringing up the 
annoyance of not having any ammo)

* Slightly nerfed the Death realm's Nether Storm spell

* "Empty" barbarian talismans with nothing on them should no longer 
generate

* Monsters now cast spells slightly more intelligently (thanks to Mocht 
for suggesting that they be able to learn about anti-teleportation)

* Skillmasters no longer get Vampirism True cheaper than other classes

* Races with more HP than spectres now have their racial HP reduced to 
that of the spectre while in wraithform

* All items in an object prompt are now guaranteed to have a slot label 
(previously, conflicts caused by an inscribed item overriding another 
object's slot label could cause objects to not have slot labels)

* All carried items now recharge fully while the player waits for a 
reforge. (This is only fair, since sleeping in the inn has this effect, 
even on short naps that consume less game time than a reforge does)

* Limited the number of active monster traps (or glyphs of warding) the 
player can concurrently have on a single level to 11, to discourage the 
very tedious but effective approach of filling large chunks of the 
level with traps before taking on a strong foe, and to encourage 
careful trap placement when more moderate versions of this approach are 
used. Rogues are exempt from this limit (because rogues). Primary-realm 
Life casters are exempt in the special case of glyphs of warding, so 
they can still freely use the Warding True spell

* Identical quivers will now stack in inventories

* Harps can generate for non-bards again

* Weapons of Gondolin now appear slightly earlier and sometimes have 
random buffs

* Improved the show_discovery option (in particular, a reforged object 
is now recorded as discovered at the time of reforging, instead of 
inheriting the base object's discovery date; it is also displayed as 
"received" rather than "picked up" or "identified")

* The daily wanted monster is now updated at midnight even if the 
player's sleeping in the inn (thanks to MITZE for suggesting this)

* Fixed various typos (don't worry! There are still plenty left)

* The display_percentages option (which was a bit of an easy-mode) has 
been combined with the wizard mode's "show damage/hit" features into a 
new easy_damage birth option. (7.0.peppermint characters with 
display_percentages on will have easy_damage turned on if they upgrade 
to 7.0.mango)

* Tweaked weapon proficiency slightly (characters who previously 
started at Unskilled (-20) with a weapon will now start at Unskilled 
(-10), unless Unskilled (-20) is their maximum proficiency for that 
weapon). This has minimal effects on the game's balance or difficulty, 
but reduces proficiency-grinding tedium a bit

* Axemasters can now master hatchets (however, some of their melee 
bonuses still don't apply to hatchets, only to larger axes)

* Unidentified ammo is now automatically placed in the quiver if it is 
known to combine with ammo already in the quiver

* Pet uniques now have a chance of turning hostile if damaged by the 
player (this does not apply to the player's current mount)

* Monsters summoned by friendly monsters will now usually also be 
friendly (except in the case of stupid summoners, e.g. quylthulgs)

* Tweaked pet summoning (pets are now less likely to summon uniques, 
especially strong uniques)

* Friendly monsters now have a chance to turn hostile if their parent 
monster (group leader or summoner) was friendly and turns hostile

* Mana is now lost slightly faster if the player's pet upkeep factor is 
too high; and if the upkeep is totally excessive, pets may feel 
neglected and either dismiss themselves or turn hostile. (Thanks to 
vertigo for his feedback on pet upkeep)

* Fixed a bizarre issue with mana loss (the hungrier the player was, 
the slower mana was lost; if the player was fainting from hunger, no 
mana was lost at all)

* It is now possible to use capture balls on pet uniques and Nazguls

* Added more talk lines for friendly monsters

* Nerfed summoning staves in response to feedback from players. Staves 
of Summon Hounds, Ants and Hydras now have a meaningful chance (1/3 to 
1/4) of summoning hostile monsters (note that summon hydras summons 
hostile reptiles rather than hostile hydras). Staves of Summon Monsters 
have a lower (1/10) hostility chance, but cannot summon non-hostile 
summoners

* Player-aligned (or player-summoned) monsters no longer receive XP for 
killing other player-summoned monsters (plugging an exploit mentioned 
by wobbly)

* Added more random artifact names (mostly for lamps and amulets)

* Added a random player name generator (based on Vanilla's random 
artifact name generator). The generator mostly suggests 
Tolkienian-sounding names, but sometimes offers a Latin-sounding name 
instead

* Changed hitpoint warning default from 30% to 50%

* Cancelling a throw during the targetting phase no longer costs a turn

* The object list now displays all town buildings, not just shops 
(partly copied from Composband 7.1.alpha). There is also a new option 
to display stairs in the object list (useful if you want to dive and 
can map the nearby area easily). This option can be speedily toggled in 
the object list itself by pressing S

* The highscore list and the hidden oook data now give the maximum 
level attained by a character, rather than current level

* Improved oook compatibility for character names with apostrophes 
(thanks to pav for helping with this)

* Introduced options to display equipment origins in the character dump 
(on as a default for winners and dead characters, off as a default for 
living non-winners)

* Random quest rewards can no longer be cursed (unless the game fails 
to generate a reward that isn't cursed)

* Various minor tweaks and code improvements

-------------------------------------------------------

Changes in FrogComposband 7.0.peppermint:

* Totally revamped the no-wilderness town, and fixed quest descriptions 
so they're accurate with both wilderness and no wilderness

* Introduced a V-like system for tracking and describing object origins 
(e.g. "Dropped by the Variant Maintainer on level 19 of Orc Cave."). 
This system can be turned off (or expanded further) in the text display 
options

* Added back the no_selling birth option. In no_selling mode, selling 
items is disabled but gold drops are increased to compensate. The 
intention is that selling players and non-selling players will 
accumulate gold at roughly the same pace, but since this was calibrated 
based on my own games, it may not hold for players with different 
playstyles. No_selling mode does not have any effect on gold drops in 
the wilderness

* Added a new option (easy_mimics) for players who really hate mimics, 
cloakers, death swords, wall monsters etc. and want to reglyph them. 
Turning on easy_mimics makes these monsters use the 'x' glyph instead 
of their normal glyph (the monsters will retain their normal color, 
unless that's pitch black, in which case it's changed to a slightly 
less black black). It also makes monsters with the ATTR_CLEAR flag 
possible to see. (Note that easy_mimics does not affect tree monsters 
or weird fumes, which can be recognized through their color, nor does 
it affect creeping coins or death scythes)

* Made easy_id stronger (it now *identifies* all items on walkover)

* It is now possible to request a new quest immediately after receiving 
the reward for the old one, without the need to exit and re-enter the 
building

* Added a never_forget birth option for the ellipos types, which 
essentially protects the player from amnesia and also gives ellipos's 
easy labyrinth

* Added two new birth options (no_chris and no_scrambling) that prevent 
dungeon teleports and stat scrambling, respectively. (Both cause 
different bad things to happen instead; they are not intended as 
easy-mode, but as options for players who find chrissing and/or stat 
scrambling unfun and think the game would be better if those effects 
didn't exist.)

* Added new monsters and tweaked existing ones

* Adapted some changes to artifacts that Gwarl made for ComPosband 
7.0.4

* Added a new quest in Zul that enables teleporting between Zul and 
other towns if successfully completed
[A fair warning about this quest. It's not *that* hard if you have 
great stealth, but if you have poor stealth - or worse, aggravation - 
things can get... entertaining. This is true of most quests of course, 
but particularly true here. Doing it with both aggravation and low 
speed is not recommended, and Sexy characters should treat it as an 
endgame quest and approach it with extreme caution.]

* Rings and Death Swords are no longer limited to 1x free action or see 
invisible

* Fixed a bug in Thalos that made the library inaccessible in late game

* Fixed a bug with lawyer *identify* (it cost zero mana and allowed the 
player to also do normal identify on a different item)

* Fixed a bug that caused items in the home display to be sometimes 
shown with a value of zero

* Fixed an old bug that caused some timed effects to be decreased on 
game load, allowing the player to cure fear by saving and loading 
repeatedly. (Something similar may still happen with other things, the 
code needs closer scrutiny)

* Fixed an old PosChengband bug that allowed hidden information about 
immunities to leak to the player through the character sheet

* Fixed an old PosChengband bug that sometimes caused the game to crash 
on mangy leper attacks due to division by zero (thanks to Hugo for 
spotting and reporting it)

* Fixed an ancient bug that made quests uncompletable if one of the 
target monsters evolved or got polymorphed (this should now be 
impossible), and tweaked monster evolution code (all of which is now in 
time_lord.c, instead of being needlessly duplicated)

* Fixed a problem with using the '-' key to select a floor item in the 
inscription menu

* Fixed an old bug that caused the game to crash with quest_unique off 
if too many target monsters were killed in a random Angband quest

* Fixed an old bug that allowed skeletons to double their food pile by 
eating from it

* Fixed an old bug that caused the wilderness to not generate properly 
(potentially causing crashes) if the player saved and loaded the game 
inside the arena

* Fixed a minor bug with using an unidentified device of detect traps, 
which didn't mark grids as trap-detected even in cases where the 
effect's obviousness meant there was no need to avoid spoiling (thanks 
to nikheizen for reporting this)

* Plugged a number of old loopholes that allowed doppelgangers to 
retain their demigod powers in forms other than Human and Demigod 
(thanks to murphy for reporting this)

* Plugged an old information leak when uppercase keys were used in the 
object prompt (thanks to murphy for reporting this as well)

* Objects thrown at a wall now land on the last square before the wall, 
rather than attempting to land on the wall itself and ending up placed 
on a random square adjacent to it (potentially creating the impression 
of an object flying through a wall - thanks to bostock for reminding me 
of this)

* Destroying high-level law books now gives XP where appropriate 
(thanks to bostock for this too)

* Slightly lowered the max power of ultra-strong deep dungeon randarts

* Slightly changed how the reforge cap is calculated to compensate for 
it now being easier to acquire fame (due to the increased number of 
quests). The cap now increases slightly slower in the fame range 128 to 
223 (early late game), with no effect on either midgame reforging or 
very-late-game reforging. Essentially, the idea behind this change is 
to keep midgame reforging viable and keep late game reforging strong, 
but still make it somewhat harder to reach the late game reforge power

* Removed rogues' class life rating bonus

* Mine and Heaven now have bottom guardians

* Made the black aura worse

* Amulets of anti-summoning can no longer be generated on a shuffle

* Snotlings and doppelgangers can no longer shuffle for mushrooms

* Added a new deep cloak ego

* Added new artifacts

* Added more race-specific rewards for unusual races

* Made the Death realm's Vampirism True spell considerably more 
expensive

* Nerfed the Law realm's Expert Trap spell

* Made lawyer melee slightly weaker

* Improved savefile compatibility when new uniques are added

* Reduced the number of non-town monsters, and especially monster 
groups, that appear in areas near towns

* Some early random Angband quests have a 20% chance to generate a 
bonus reward (to compensate for an earlier change by Chris in 
PosChengband that affected these quests negatively)

* Made melee attacks slightly more likely to break a glyph of warding

* The Hideout entrance, while still in Outpost, has been moved south; 
and the player now starts the game on the Warrens entrance, not the 
Hideout one. [Copied from ComPosband 7.1.0a]

* Imported new random artifact names from ComPosband 7.1.0a

* Potions of cure critical wounds no longer cure poison [they were 
never intended to in ComPosband, and it was weird that they did when 
potions of healing did not]

* Tweaked the walls of Crystal Castle
[Copied from ComPosband 7.0.4]

* Introduced a new flag that gives confused monsters a chance to shake 
their confusion off super-fast before they move. (Currently, no monster 
actually has this flag, apart from Utgard-Loke)

* Monsters should no longer generate on top of enclosed 1x1 dark pits

* Made the Temple more likely to stock potions of cure serious wounds 
during the early game

* Corrected a minor issue with fear message grammar after a throw 
attack

* Improved the oook data in HTML character dumps (it now gives max exp 
rather than cur exp, and also gives the player's true race rather than 
a race they were temporarily polymorphed into or mimicking)

* Moved the Volcano, Dragon Slayer and Demon Slayer quests much deeper

* Updated the in-game FAQ

-------------------------------------------------------

Changes in FrogComposband 7.0.strawberry (compared to ComPosband 
7.0.3):

* Rebalanced artifact reforging. The goal was to prevent silly-powerful 
items while still allowing very strong items (so a character can 
reasonably expect to use reforged items in the endgame and final 
fights). The importance of fame in reforging was reduced slightly to 
make early/mid-game reforging more appealing, though realistically 
reforging will likely remain mostly a late-game thing. Slot weights 
were also adjusted slightly, with effects on both reforging and randart 
creation. The hard cap of 90000 on the source artifact's power was 
removed, although stronger artifacts will still be treated as if they 
had a power of 90000, or even less for less weighty slots. This 
prevents situations in which a very strong item is effectively worse 
than a weaker item because it doesn't fit the player's needs directly 
and cannot ever be reforged. Reforging is now also slightly cheaper

* Rebalanced shop shuffling. The cheap shuffling introduced in 
ComPosband allowed characters to acquire silly piles of extremely 
powerful consumables very easily, as long as they found a dungeon shop 
and had enough money. The cheap shuffling has been retained, but many 
of the most powerful items (like !Healing, !*Healing*, !Life, stat 
potions, ?Genocide, ?MassGenocide and !NewLife) can no longer be 
generated on a shuffle. Also, Black Market shuffling is more expensive 
now

* Moved Thalos, and added a new town (Anambar) where Thalos used to be. 
Prettied up the Thalos map (and edited t_pref to include additional 
terrain types). Mt. Olympus is now slightly more accessible since 
Thalos is closer to it than any town was before (originally, I moved 
Thalos even closer to Mt. Olympus, but then I decided I didn't hate you 
players enough). There's an option to allow teleporting to Thalos as 
soon as any two other towns (including Outpost) have been visited 
(because I decided I didn't want you players to hate me either...!)

* Fixed an old PosChengband bug where quest seeds were lost on 
save/load, meaning players who exited the game after requesting a quest 
would receive a seed of 0 for that quest and consequently always get 
the first item from a list of supposedly random rewards

* Fixed another old PosChengband bug whereby uniques seen through fuzzy 
telepathy would sometimes acquire a stray "the" in front of their name 
(e.g. "The Gertrude dies.")

* Fixed an old bug with file handling on Windows

* Fixed several minor old bugs related to weapon slays (chaos weapons 
were getting massive extra damage against good monsters from the 
KILL_EVIL flag instead of the KILL_GOOD flag; the displayed damage for 
a KILL_HUMAN missile didn't match the actual damage; in the character 
sheet, the *Human* slay's statistics were displayed for weapons with 
KILL_LIVING rather than weapons with KILL_HUMAN)

* Updated the rumor list and silly name list

* Added a new realm (Law) and two new classes (Lawyer and Ninja-Lawyer)

* Added new monsters (and restored the deleted Egyptian gods)

* Added a few artifacts (and brought back the GHB's T-shirt)

* Added new random artifact names

* Added new quests (I actually feel like there may be too many 
early-game quests now; feedback on the number of quests, and quests 
[whether new or old] that players like or don't like, would be 
particularly welcome; of course, there is no need to attempt to do 
every quest in the game at depth)

* In ComPosband, if a quest level was buggy and didn't generate 
properly, the game would crash and the player would be forced to fail 
it on resuming play. In FrogComposband, while the game will still 
crash, the player can continue normally on resumption and can retake 
the quest after it has been fixed. This should make life easier for 
both developers and test-players

* Gave eldraks a significant buff, they are now stronger than ettins 
(consequently, swapped ettin and eldrak in the troll evolution 
sequence; however, player trolls still evolve into ettins rather than 
eldraks)

* A small number of monsters can now initiate melee attacks from 2 
squares away. (Fair's fair - player samurai, dragons and archaeologists 
with whips can do this!) Currently the only monsters with this ability 
are large dinosaurs, novice archaeologists, balrogs, samurai, Godzilla 
and Jormungand. (Jormungand, who was a soft guardian for its depth, 
also received a number of other buffs; most notably, it now has the 
CAN_SWIM flag instead of the AQUATIC flag.)

* Made ninjas slightly less outrageous by nerfing Bunshin (which now 
gives a 1-in-3 chance of evading attacks, not 1-in-2) and Swap Position 
(which now requires perfectly clear line of sight) and changing their 
weight limit equation. The Swap Position nerf also affects the relevant 
mutation and wild talent (the weight limit change does not affect other 
classes with a weight limit, apart from ninja-lawyers)

* Restored the option of playing without virtues

* Fixed some typos here and there. (I know this will offend some 
people! But they can take solace in that there are still plenty left.)

* Buffed Lucifer and made him dungeon boss of Hell

* The name of Sultan the Midget was reverted back to Snafu the Midget 
(because of the one-Sultan rule - there's a sultan in Thalos)

* Players are now less likely to be ambushed by dangerous high-level 
sea monsters in coastal towns

* Added some alternatives for non-English keyboards to support play on 
angband.live: Y and Z for [ and {, Ctrl+Y for Ctrl+W, Ctrl+E for @ and 
Ctrl+O for ]

* Made free action stronger because Chris's system was somewhat 
confusing and unpopular, though the change here is not as big as what 
Gwarl did in ComPosband 7.0.4. 1 source of free action works the same 
in FrogComposband as in ComPosband 7.0.3 (and the last versions of 
PosChengband). 2 sources are slightly stronger in FrogComposband (and 
give total paralysis immunity against low-level monsters), and 3 
sources give total immunity against all monsters, except in special 
cases like ty_curse

* Changed how cur SP is calculated after a change to max SP

* Restored the old non-fuzzy telepathy as an option. Chris's fuzzy 
telepathy is still the default

* Added an option (off by default) to force a -more- prompt on 
device/spell fails

* Attempts to charm a monster with the hidden NOPET flag now give the 
message "X is immune", rather than "X resists"; the NOPET flag is 
unpopular enough without it making players guess whether the monster 
has it or not. (It's also now slightly harder for monsters to acquire 
the NOPET flag.)

* Commented out the Windows pref file (font-win.prf). Windows users 
will notice this as a change to the default appearance of walls and 
mountains

* Various minor tweaks and code improvements

Changes copied or adapted from ComPosband 7.0.4:

* Added Gwarl's new quests and adopted some of his changes to existing 
quests

* The entrance to Hideout is now in Outpost, and the entrance to Icky 
Cave is now in Thalos

* Adapted the new acid floor

* Magic shop now sells offensive wands

* Moved Tidal Cave

* Battlefield's entrance guardian is now a black wraith instead of a 
grave wight

* Visual change to the appearance of Crystal Castle's glass floor

* Added Gwarl's buff to non-specialist riding

* Tweaked the depth and rarity of a number of items, especially dragon 
scale mails (but not quite to the same extent as in ComPosband 7.0.4)

* Tweaked a number of monsters

-------------------------------------------------------

For ancient history, see [a].

