Warlocks

A Warlock is a magical class but, unlike normal spellcasters, they 
derive their powers, stats, skills and bonuses by making a pact with a 
given class of monsters. This pact is irrevocable and is made at the 
outset of the Warlock's career. Depending on the class of monsters with 
whom they ally, the warlock will gain unique bonuses, abilities and 
magical powers. For example, alliance with the forces of the 
netherworld grants resistances to poison and nether, enhanced 
constitution and spells to control and conjure the unliving as well as 
spells to access the damaging forces of the netherworld directly. Each 
such alliance has thematic bonuses and powers, and you can read the 
details in the respective help sections. On final comment: allying with 
a given class of monsters dramatically reduces the warlock's ability to 
fight these foes. Instead, the warlock seeks cooperation with their 
brethren, or, perhaps, domination over them. But direct assaults are 
rarely successful.
 
In addition to pact related spells, all warlocks gain access to the 
unique power of the Eldritch Blast. Their primary spell stat is 
Charisma since they seek dominion and alliance with their chosen kin, 
and these monsters tend to have a strong will of their own, resisting 
the binding forces which the warlock imposes to gain both mastery and 
power.

Undead
Undead are tough creatures, each having survived death at least once. 
Warlocks who make a pact with Undead will find themselves gaining 
additional resistances such as cold, poison, darkness and nether. In 
addition, they will be able to see their kind, which tend to be 
invisible, and gain resistance to life draining forces. They will also 
gain access to undeadly powers, which typically involve detection and 
control over the forces of the netherworld. In the end, this pact will 
allow its practitioners to destroy monsters with a single word, and, 
perhaps, to even partially leave the world of the living altogether. Of 
course, allying with the undead substantially reduces the warlock's 
ability to fight these creatures.

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      -1        Disarming   Poor (20)    
  Intelligence  +2        Device      Superb (65)  
  Wisdom        -3        Save        Excellent (35
  Dexterity     +0        Stealth     Very Good (6)
  Constitution  +2        Searching   Poor (16)    
  Charisma      +4        Perception  Fair (20)    
  Life Rating  107%       Melee       Fair (43)    
  Base HP       15        Bows        Poor (30)    
  Experience   135%
  
Dragons
The bond between a Dragonrider and a Dragon is one of the strongest and 
most enduring ties seen the world over. Each draws strength, power, and 
encouragement from the other, and together they make a formidable foe. 
An alliance with Dragonkind enables this bond to form, and the Warlock 
of this pact gains impressive powers for mounted combat. Indeed, they 
are among the elite riders of the world, only slightly inferior to 
Cavalry and Beastmasters. But where they have a slight deficiency in 
skill (and perhaps in melee as well), they have a strong advantage in 
riding techniques and magical enhancements. Dragonriders favor the 
lance above all other weapons and seek continuously for the lengendary 
'Dragonlance' which they view as their long lost birthright.

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      +2        Disarming   Bad (15)     
  Intelligence  +0        Device      Good (30)    
  Wisdom        +0        Save        Fair (15)    
  Dexterity     -1        Stealth     Fair (3)     
  Constitution  +1        Searching   Poor (14)    
  Charisma      +3        Perception  Poor (12)    
  Life Rating  102%       Melee       Fair (52)    
  Base HP       10        Bows        Poor (30)    
  Experience   130%
  
Angels
Angels are heavenly beings who use a variety of techniques to smite 
those they view as evil. Warlocks who make pacts with Angels will also 
find their saving throws significantly improved, and (eventually) their 
body immune to bolt-like effects. Since Angels are strongly aligned 
with the forces of good, making a pact with Angels will reduce damage 
done to all good monsters by a substantial amount.

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      +1        Disarming   Bad (15)     
  Intelligence  +1        Device      Very Good (40
  Wisdom        +2        Save        Superb (50)  
  Dexterity     +1        Stealth     Fair (3)     
  Constitution  +1        Searching   Poor (16)    
  Charisma      +3        Perception  Bad (8)      
  Life Rating   98%       Melee       Fair (43)    
  Base HP        4        Bows        Poor (30)    
  Experience   150%
  
Demons
Demons are crafty creatures of the netherworld, using whatever means at 
their disposal to bring down their enemies. Warlocks who make pacts 
with Demons will find their abilities to use all magical devices 
improved, and gain the ability to Recharge these devices at will. 
Eventually, Demon Warlocks attain the ability to crush walls beneath 
their footsteps. Making a pact with Demons will reduce damage done to 
all demons by a substantial amount.

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      +3        Disarming   Bad (15)     
  Intelligence  +1        Device      Superb (65)  
  Wisdom       -10        Save        Excellent (35
  Dexterity     +1        Stealth     Poor (2)     
  Constitution  +1        Searching   Poor (12)    
  Charisma      +3        Perception  Bad (2)      
  Life Rating  100%       Melee       Excellent (84
  Base HP       15        Bows        Poor (30)    
  Experience   150%
  
Hounds
An alliance with hounds is one of the weaker pacts the warlock may 
make. Hounds are fast, stealthy and nimble, and the warlock will gain 
these attributes as well, in addition to basic elemental resistances. 
They also gain decent melee, but other skills, especially device 
skills, are somewhat lacking. Of course, they may call on their kin for 
assistance, but this may not be enough against the more difficult foes 
of the world. Still, hounds are very common and many consider them to 
be annoying as well, so perhaps an alliance is in order?

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      +0        Disarming   Bad (15)     
  Intelligence  -2        Device      Fair (25)    
  Wisdom        -2        Save        Fair (16)    
  Dexterity     +2        Stealth     Excellent (7)
  Constitution  +2        Searching   Fair (20)    
  Charisma      +2        Perception  Poor (15)    
  Life Rating  102%       Melee       Excellent (86
  Base HP       12        Bows        Bad (20)     
  Experience   110%
  
Spiders
Of all the icky, crawling things in the world, you have chosen to make 
an alliance with spiders? Sure, they are stealthy, and fast, and very 
adept at hiding. Able to extrude a fine sticky substance to ensnare the 
unwary, the spider lurks nearby, or so you assume since you very seldom 
see them. Moreover, many spiders are adept at the powers of 
teleportation, able to jump quickly from one location to another, which 
can be quite baffling to a would be predator. They are comfortable with 
both poison and nexus. But, aside from all of this, they are a bit on 
the squishy side. That is, if you can manage to catch one!

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      -1        Disarming   Bad (15)     
  Intelligence  +0        Device      Excellent (42
  Wisdom        -2        Save        Fair (16)    
  Dexterity     +2        Stealth     Superb (9)   
  Constitution  +0        Searching   Poor (12)    
  Charisma      +2        Perception  Bad (2)      
  Life Rating   97%       Melee       Fair (46)    
  Base HP        1        Bows        Very Good (75
  Experience   120%
  
Giants
An alliance with giants and titans grants impressive physical strength 
and fortitude, but other stats will generally suffer. Later in life, 
you will gain giant-like resistances including sound, shards and chaos. 
Your combat will be impressive, but, like giants, you will favor heavy 
weapons. Oh, and you won't mind tossing a boulder or two should the 
need arise. Since this alliance offers so much in the way of physical 
advantages, it offers very little in the way of magical abilities or 
skill. Warlocks with this alliance are the best possible fighters being 
nearly indistiguishable in skill from Warriors!

  Stats                   Skills
  Strength      +2        Disarming   Bad (15)     
  Intelligence  -4        Device      Bad (10)     
  Wisdom        -4        Save        Fair (16)    
  Dexterity     -3        Stealth     Poor (2)     
  Constitution  +2        Searching   Poor (12)    
  Charisma      +2        Perception  Bad (2)      
  Life Rating  112%       Melee       Superb (150) 
  Base HP       25        Bows        Fair (45)    
  Experience   140%
  
Table 1 - Warlock Statistic Bonus Table

                  STR  INT  WIS  DEX  CON  CHR  Life  BHP  Exp
Undead             -1   +2   -3   +0   +2   +4  107%  +15  135%
Dragons            +2   +0   +0   -1   +1   +3  102%  +10  130%
Angels             +1   +1   +2   +1   +1   +3   98%   +4  150%
Demons             +3   +1  -10   +1   +1   +3  100%  +15  150%
Hounds             +0   -2   -2   +2   +2   +2  102%  +12  110%
Spiders            -1   +0   -2   +2   +0   +2   97%   +1  120%
Giants             +2   -4   -4   -3   +2   +2  112%  +25  140%


Table 2 - Warlock Skill Bonus Table I

                  Disarming     Device        Save          Stealth      
Undead            Poor (20)     Superb (65)   Excellent (35 Very Good (6)
Dragons           Bad (15)      Good (30)     Fair (15)     Fair (3)     
Angels            Bad (15)      Very Good (40 Superb (50)   Fair (3)     
Demons            Bad (15)      Superb (65)   Excellent (35 Poor (2)     
Hounds            Bad (15)      Fair (25)     Fair (16)     Excellent (7)
Spiders           Bad (15)      Excellent (42 Fair (16)     Superb (9)   
Giants            Bad (15)      Bad (10)      Fair (16)     Poor (2)     


Table 3 - Warlock Skill Bonus Table II

                  Searching     Perception    Melee         Bows         
Undead            Poor (16)     Fair (20)     Fair (43)     Poor (30)    
Dragons           Poor (14)     Poor (12)     Fair (52)     Poor (30)    
Angels            Poor (16)     Bad (8)       Fair (43)     Poor (30)    
Demons            Poor (12)     Bad (2)       Excellent (84 Poor (30)    
Hounds            Fair (20)     Poor (15)     Excellent (86 Bad (20)     
Spiders           Poor (12)     Bad (2)       Fair (46)     Very Good (75
Giants            Poor (12)     Bad (2)       Superb (150)  Fair (45)    




Automatically generated for Composband 7.1.0.

